to the ambassadors of england gives
this warlike volley.
Ham. O, i die, horatio!
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from england,
but i do prophesy th' election lights
on fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
which have solicited- the rest is silence. Dies.
Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
[march within. ]
why does the drum come hither?
Enter fortinbras and english ambassadors, with drum,
colours, and attendants.
Fort. Where is this sight?
Hor. What is it you will see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
Fort. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
what feast is toward in thine eternal cell
that thou so many princes at a shot
so bloodily hast struck.
Ambassador. The sight is dismal;
and our affairs from england come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us bearing
to tell him his commandment is fulfill'd
that rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?
Hor. Not from his mouth,
had it th' ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
you from the polack wars, and you from england,
are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
high on a stage be placed to the view;
and let me speak to the yet unknowing world
how these things came about. So shall you hear
of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
and, in this upshot, purposes mistook
fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can i
truly deliver.
Fort. Let us haste to hear it,
and call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow i embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom
which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Hor. Of that i shall have also cause to speak,
and from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
But let this same be presently perform'd,
even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
on plots and errors happen.
Fort. Let four captains
bear hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
for he was likely, had he been put on,
to have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
the soldiers' music and the rites of war
speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
are shot off.
The end