------------------Alphabet sorted text:-------------------

1604
A double blessing is a double grace;
A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.
A gentleman, courtier.
A norwegian captain.
A room in the castle.
Act ii. Scene i.
Act iii. Scene i.
A second time i kill my husband dead
A priest.
A table and flagons of wine on it.
Adieu, adieu, adieu! Remember me. Exit.
A noise within: 'let her come in. '
Act v. Scene i.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
Ambassador. The sight is dismal;
All. Treason! Treason!
And i beseech you instantly to visit
And now, laertes, what's the news with you?
And you the judges, bear a wary eye.
At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
And shall i couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart!
Act i. Scene i.
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends. "
Act iv. Scene i.
All. No, let's come in!
All. Gentlemen!
An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
Anon, as patient as the female dove
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
Away! For everything is seal'd and done
Be buried quick with her, and so will i.
Ber. I have seen nothing.
Bernardo, officer.
But let this same be presently perform'd,
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
A villain kills my father; and for that,
All may be well. He kneels.
All. Lights, lights, lights!
And even the like precurse of fierce events,
Ber. 'tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, francisco.
And never come mischance between us twain!
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
Ber. Have you had quiet guard?
Behind the arras i'll convey myself
Ber. He.
Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so.
Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
Ber. Long live the king!
Ber. Say-
Ber. Well, good night.
Ber. Welcome, horatio. Welcome, good marcellus.
Ber. Who's there. ?
Both. We will haste us.
But in our circumstance and course of thought,
Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
But in battalions! First, her father slain;
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
But on! Six barbary horses against six french swords, their
But soft! But soft! Aside! Here comes the king-
But soft! Behold! Lo, where it comes again!
But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
But wilt thou bear me how i did proceed?
But, in the verity of extolment, i take him to be a soul of great
Clown. 'tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to you.
Clown. 'twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as
All. Our duty to your honour.
All. We will, we will!
And for my means, i'll husband them so well
And for that purpose i'll anoint my sword.
And i, of ladies most deject and wretched,
And of all christian souls, i pray god. God b' wi', you.
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
And will he not come again?
Ber. 'tis here!
Ber. In the same figure, like the king that's dead.
Ber. It would be spoke to.
Ber. Last night of all,
Ber. See, it stalks away!
Ber. Sit down awhile,
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
Clown. 'a was the first that ever bore arms.
Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.
Ber. Looks it not like the king? Mark it, horatio.
By the mass, i was about to say something! Where did i leave?
Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
Clown. How can that be, unless she drown'd herself in her own
But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now,
Ber. How now, horatio? You tremble and look pale.
Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 'a pour'd a flagon of
Clown. A whoreson, mad fellow's it was. Whose do you think it was?
Clown. E'en that.
Clown. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight
Clown. Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
Clown. Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many
Clown. (sings)
Clown. (sings)
Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
Clown. For no man, sir.
Clown. I like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well.
Clown. Mine, sir.
Clown. To't.
Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the scripture?
Clown. Is she to be buried in christian burial when she wilfully
Clown. For none neither.
Clown. It must be se offendendo; it cannot be else. For here lies
Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, i came to't that day that our
Clown. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.
Clown. Very strangely, they say.
Clown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'a shall recover his wits there;
Clown. Why, here in denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy
Clown. Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk
Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.
Cornelius, courtier.
Come. (they play. ) another hit. What say you?
Couch we awhile, and mark.
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet ophelia!
Elsinore. A churchyard.
Elsinore. A hall in the castle.
Elsinore. A platform before the castle.
Elsinore. Another room in the castle.
Elsinore. Another room in the castle.
English ambassadors.
Enter [two players as] king and queen.
But, orderly to end where i begun,
By his cockle bat and' staff
Capt. Against some part of poland.
Capt. I will do't, my lord.
Capt. God b' wi' you, sir. [exit. ]
Capt. The nephew to old norway, fortinbras.
Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition,
Capt. They are of norway, sir.
Capt. Yes, it is already garrison'd.
Come, gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Come, some music!
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
Delay it not; i'll have him hence to-night.
Elsinore. A passage in the castle.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Enter fortinbras with his army over the stage.
Enter hamlet and guildenstern [with attendants].
Enter hamlet, rosencrantz, [guildenstern, ] and others.
Enter hamlet.
Enter hamlet.
Enter king and queen, with rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Enter king, rosencrantz, and guildenstern.
Enter horatio, queen, and a gentleman.
Enter king.
Enter queen and polonius.
Enter lucianus.
Enter ophelia distracted.
Enter polonius.
Enter polonius.
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Enter a messenger.
Enter fortinbras and english ambassadors, with drum,
Enter king and laertes.
Enter sailors.
Enter king, queen, laertes, osric, and lords, with other
Enter the ghost in his nightgown.
Enter ghost again.
Enter hamlet and horatio afar off.
Enter the players with recorders.
Enter rosencrantz.
Enter horatio and marcellus.
Enter hamlet and horatio.
Enter laertes with others.
Enter ophelia.
Enter two clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].
Enter horatio with an attendant.
Enter prologue.
Enter two sentinels-[first, ] francisco, [who paces up and down
Exeunt [all but the captain].
Exeunt [rosencrantz and guildenstern].
Exeunt
Exeunt all but hamlet and horatio.
Exeunt gentlemen.
Exeunt.
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern]
Exeunt.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
Exeunt.
Enter young osric, a courtier.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble hamlet.
Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Exeunt.
Exit ghost.
Exeunt.
Guil. But with much forcing of his disposition.
Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
Hor. 'tis here!
Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing
Hor. Do, if it will not stand.
King. Love? His affections do not that way tend;
King. Sweet gertrude, leave us too;
Mar. 'tis gone!
Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Queen. Did he receive you well?
Mar. Shall i strike at it with my partisan?
Oph. At home, my lord.
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
Pol. 'tis most true;
Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- what was i about to say?
Queen. Did you assay him
And what make you from wittenberg, horatio?
Be as ourself in denmark. Madam, come.
Break we our watch up; and by my advice
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
But break my heart, for i must hold my tongue!
But if the gods themselves did see her then,
But let that go.
But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
But now, my cousin hamlet, and my son-
But soft! Methinks i scent the morning air.
But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.
But what is your affair in elsinore?
But virtue, as it never will be mov'd,
But, as we often see, against some storm,
But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
Cor. , volt. In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'the murther of
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
Elsinore. A room of state in the castle.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Enter a king and a queen very lovingly; the queen embracing
Enter hamlet.
Enter four or five players.
Enter horatio, marcellus, and bernardo.
Enter king and polonius.
Enter king, queen, polonius, ophelia, rosencrantz, guildenstern, and lords.
Enter polonius, voltemand, and cornelius.
Exeunt king and polonius].
Exeunt polonius and players [except the first].
Exeunt voltemand and cornelius.
Fie on't! Ah, fie! 'tis an unweeded garden
Fie upon't! Foh! About, my brain! Hum, i have heard
Flourish. Exeunt all but hamlet.
Flourish. [enter claudius, king of denmark, gertrude the queen, hamlet,
For hecuba!
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
Get you a place.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
Ghost. If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.
Ham. Am i not i' th' right, old jephthah?
Ham. Do you think i meant country matters?
Ham. I mean, my head upon your lap?
Ham. Nay, that follows not.
Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! Most horrible!
Ham. That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.
Ham. O my prophetic soul!
Ham. They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Ham. Why,
Ham. Why,
Ham. 'tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon. -
Ham. Ay, so, god b' wi' ye!
Ham. I am glad to see you well.
Ham. I am very glad to see you. - [to bernardo] good even, sir. -
Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;
Ham. Lady, shall i lie in your lap?
Ham. Nothing.
Ham. Sir, my good friend- i'll change that name with you.
Ham. Speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronounc'd it to you,
Ham. Who, i?
Hor. Hail to your lordship!
Horatio! - or i do forget myself.
Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Ham. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so,
Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.
Ham. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?
Ham. O god, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?
Ham. O jephthah, judge of israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
Ham. O that this too too solid flesh would melt,
Ham. Very well. Follow that lord- and look you mock him not.
Ham. Thrift, thrift, horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
Ham. What did you enact?
Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.
Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a
How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.
Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
Ham. Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow.
Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.
Ham. God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his
Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard. - prithee say on.
Ham. No, nor mine now. [to polonius] my lord, you play'd once
Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
Ham. Not so, my lord. I am too much i' th' sun.
He closes thus: 'i know the gentleman.
Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to
Ham. Seems, madam, nay, it is. I know not 'seems. '
Hor. My lord, i came to see your father's funeral.
Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for i'll have a
Hor. So have i heard and do in part believe it.
Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the question:
Her father and myself (lawful espials)
I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
I pray thee stay with us, go not to wittenberg.
I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
King. 'tis sweet and commendable in your nature, hamlet,
King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
King. It likes us well;
King. Though yet of hamlet our dear brother's death
King. We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
King. Have you your father's leave? What says polonius?
King. How fares our cousin hamlet?
King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
King. [aside] o, 'tis too true!
King. Well, we shall sift him.
Laer. My dread lord,
Let not the royal bed of denmark be
Let's do't, i pray; and i this morning know
Mad call i it; for, to define true madness,
King. I have nothing with this answer, hamlet. These words are not
King. Take thy fair hour, laertes. Time be thine,
King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
O hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
Out, out, thou strumpet fortune! All you gods,
1. Play. 'anon he finds him,
1. Play. 'but who, o who, had seen the mobled queen-'
Mar. My good lord!
Marcellus?
Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.
Most welcome home! Exeunt ambassadors.
Must i remember? Why, she would hang on him
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
Now follows, that you know, young fortinbras,
O heavy burthen!
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
O, vengeance!
Oph. Ay, my lord.
Oph. I think nothing, my lord.
Oph. Madam, i wish it may.
My uncle?
O what a rogue and peasant slave am i!
Oph. Ay, my lord.
Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.
Oph. What is, my lord?
Oph. You are merry, my lord.
Or that the everlasting had not fix'd
1. Play. 'run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
1. Play. Ay, my lord.
1. Play. Ay, my lord.
1. Play. What speech, my good lord?
Player. I warrant your honour.
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
Pol. Come, sirs.
Pol. Fore god, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
Pol. God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!
Pol. I did enact julius caesar; i was kill'd i' th' capitol; brutus
Pol. My lord, i will use them according to their desert.
Pol. That did i, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
Pol. I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
Pol. This is too long.
Pol. [to the king] o, ho! Do you mark that?
Pol. That's good! 'mobled queen' is good.
Queen. Come hither, my dear hamlet, sit by me.
Queen. Good hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
Queen. I shall obey you;
Pol. If you call me jephthah, my lord, i have a daughter that i
Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
Pol. What follows then, my lord?
Pol. What treasure had he, my lord?
Queen. If it be,
Rey. Ay, my lord,
Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, hamlet.
Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.
Rey. But, my good lord-
Ros. Good my lord!
Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,
Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players
Ros. Most like a gentleman.
Ros. We shall, my lord.
Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands
See you now-
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
Rey. At 'closes in the consequence, ' at 'friend or so, ' and
Rey. Good my lord! [going. ]
Rey. I shall, my lord.
Scene ii.
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
So excellent a king, that was to this
So, as a painted tyrant, pyrrhus stood,
So, by my former lecture and advice,
Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
Speak of it! Stay, and speak! - stop it, marcellus!
The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,
The head is not more native to the heart,
Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,
This gentle and unforc'd accord of hamlet
To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub!
Tweaks me by th' nose? Gives me the lie i' th' throat
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
What's hecuba to him, or he to hecuba,
What wouldst thou have, laertes?
Who calls me villain? Breaks my pate across?
Why, what an ass am i! This is most brave,
And these few precepts in thy memory
And so, without more circumstance at all,
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
Both. My lord, we will not.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:
Both. We'll wait upon you.
But come!
But do not go with it!
But farewell it, for i will use no art.
Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.
Be you and i behind an arras then.
But this eternal blazon must not be
But you shall hear. Thus:
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
Come.
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
Elsinore. Hall in the castle.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Elsinore. The platform before the castle.
Enter hamlet and three of the players.
Both [mar. And ber. ] we do, my lord.
Both. Longer, longer.
Both. Arm'd, my lord.
Both. We will, my lord. Exeunt they two.
But if't be he i mean, he's very wild
Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.
By heaven, i'll make a ghost of him that lets me! -
Both. My lord, from head to foot.
But you'll be secret?
Come hither, gentlemen,
Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Elsinore. A room in the house of polonius.
Consent to swear.
Elsinore. The castle. Another part of the fortifications.
Enter hamlet, horatio, and marcellus.
Elsinore. A room in the house of polonius.
Enter ghost and hamlet.
Enter ghost.
Enter hamlet, reading on a book.
Enter horatio and marcellus.
Enter horatio.
Enter laertes and ophelia.
Enter ophelia.
Enter polonius and reynaldo.
Enter polonius, rosencrantz, and guildenstern.
Enter polonius.
Enter polonius.
Enter polonius.
Exeunt [all but hamlet].
Exeunt ghost and hamlet.
Exeunt players.
Exeunt king and queen, [with attendants].
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern, [with some
Exeunt.
Ghost beckons hamlet.
Ghost cries under the stage.
Ghost. [beneath] swear.
Guil. Faith, her privates we.
Go on. I'll follow thee.
Guil. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you?
Ham. Do the boys carry it away?
Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exit [polonius].
Farewell.
Fear it, ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
Exit reynaldo.
Exit.
Flourish. [enter king and queen, rosencrantz and guildenstern, cum aliis.
Flourish for the players.
Ghost. I find thee apt;
For nature crescent does not grow alone
Ghost. Mark me.
Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is;
Ghost. My hour is almost come,
Ghost. [beneath] swear by his sword.
Guil. In what, my dear lord?
Guil. Prison, my lord?
Guil. There are the players.
Ham. A dream itself is but a shadow.
Ham. 'tis very strange.
Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
Ham. Arm'd, say you?
Ham. Bid the players make haste, [exit polonius. ] will you two
Ham. Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
Ham. For god's love let me hear!
Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore. Your hands, come! Th'
Ham. From top to toe?
Ham. Ha, ha! Are you honest?
Ham. Haste me to know't, that i, with wings as swift
For your desire to know what is between us,
Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,
Ghost. Swear.
Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
Ghost. [beneath] swear.
Guil. But we both obey,
Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Guil. Heavens make our presence and our practices
Guil. My lord, we were sent for.
Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
Guil. Happy in that we are not over-happy.
Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
Guil. My honour'd lord!
Ham. Alas, poor ghost!
Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
Ham. Ay, marry, is't;
Ham. Beggar that i am, i am even poor in thanks; but i thank you;
Ham. But where was this?
Guil. What should we say, my lord?
Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of
Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
Ham. Are you fair?
Ham. Between who?
Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
Ham. Buzz, buzz!
Ham. Did you not speak to it?
Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the
Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god
Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his majesty shall
Ham. Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all.
Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
Ham. His beard was grizzled- no?
Ham. Hold off your hands!
Ham. Denmark's a prison.
Ham. Hark you, guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer!
Ham. Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
Ham. How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?
Ham. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly i
Ham. I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath
Ham. I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it. -
Ham. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
Ham. I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your
Ham. I will watch to-night.
Ham. I will.
Ham. I would i had been there.
Ham. In my mind's eye, horatio.
Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.
Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
Ham. In the secret parts of fortune? O! Most true! She is a
Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
Ham. If thou dost marry, i'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:
Ham. Is't possible?
Ham. It is not very strange; for my uncle is king of denmark, and
Ham. It will not speak. Then will i follow it.
Ham. It waves me still.
Ham. Murther?
Ham. My lord, i have news to tell you. When roscius was an actor in
Ham. My fate cries out
Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen.
Ham. Into my grave?
Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, guildenstern? Ah,
Ham. Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
Ham. Nay, but swear't.
Ham. Nay, do not think i flatter;
Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night.
Ham. No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my
Ham. No, not i!
Ham. O god, i could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a
Ham. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights
Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men
Ham. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch'd
Ham. The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
Ham. Then i would you were so honest a man.
Ham. No, you will reveal it.
Ham. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
Ham. There's neer a villain dwelling in all denmark
Ham. These tedious old fools!
Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?
Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
Ham. Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true. Let me
Ham. Upon my sword.
Ham. Saw? Who?
Ham. Pale or red?
Ham. So be it!
Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.
Ham. Speak. I am bound to hear.
Ham. Then saw you not his face?
Ham. The king my father?
Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her
If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,
Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?
Ham. Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?
Ham. Well, god-a-mercy.
Ham. What hour now?
Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
Ham. What, ho, horatio!
Ham. Why did you laugh then, when i said 'man delights not me'?
Ham. What, look'd he frowningly.
Ham. What?
Ham. Why, anything- but to th' purpose. You were sent for; and
Ham. Why, right! You are in the right!
Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.
Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good
Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that i will more
Ham. Why, what should be the fear?
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
Ham. Words, words, words.
Ham. You should not have believ'd me; for virtue cannot so
Ham. Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
Ham. [aside] nay then, i have an eye of you. - if you love me, hold
Haply the seas, and countries different,
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Hold you the watch to-night?
Hor. (within) my lord, my lord!
Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Hor. As i do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;
Hor. Heaven secure him!
Hor. It would have much amaz'd you.
Hor. Be rul'd. You shall not go.
Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
Hor. Most constantly.
Hor. My lord, i did;
Hor. Do not, my lord!
Hor. Good my lord, tell it.
Hor. Have after. To what issue wail this come?
Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.
Hor. Heaven will direct it.
Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.
Hor. I warr'nt it will.
Hor. In faith,
Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Hor. It beckons you to go away with it,
Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.
Hor. It was, as i have seen it in his life,
Hor. My lord, i think i saw him yesternight.
Hor. My lord, the king your father.
Hor. Nay, very pale.
Hor. No, by no means!
Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.
Ham. Yes, by saint patrick, but there is, horatio,
Hor. Is it a custom?
Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
Hor. Not i, my lord, by heaven!
Hor. Not when i saw't.
Hor. O, my dear lord!
Hor. There's no offence, my lord.
Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.
Hor. What news, my lord?
Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
How now, ophelia? What's the matter?
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
Hor. O, where, my lord?
Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
Hor. Season your admiration for a while
Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
Hor. Well, my lord.
How does my good lord hamlet?
I do not set my life at a pin's fee;
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
How now, my lord? Will the king hear this piece of work?
I pray you, now receive them.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
I will requite your loves. So, fare you well.
If circumstances lead me, i will find
I never gave you aught.
King. How may we try it further?
King. It shall be so.
King. Thanks, rosencrantz and gentle guildenstern.
King. Not that i know.
I shall not look upon his like again.
King. We will try it.
Laer. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.
Laer. For hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
Laer. Think it no more.
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
Mar. Look with what courteous action
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
Oph. Do you doubt that?
King. As of a man faithful and honourable.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine),
King. But how hath she
King. Thou still hast been the father of good news.
If thou didst ever thy dear father love-
Laer. Farewell, ophelia, and remember well
Laer. Farewell. Exit.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
King. O, speak of that! That do i long to hear.
King. Welcome, dear rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Laer. Most humbly do i take my leave, my lord.
Laer. O, fear me not!
King. Do you think 'tis this?
Look to't, i charge you. Come your ways.
Mar. How is't, my noble lord?
Mar. No, it is struck.
Mar. O, wonderful!
Mar. You shall not go, my lord.
Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
Mar. Nor i, my lord.
My father- methinks i see my father.
Nay, come, let's go together.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance,
Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
Oph. I shall obey, my lord.
Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,
Oph. I shall th' effect of this good lesson keep
Oph. I was the more deceived.
Oph. My lord, i do not know,
Oph. No, my good lord; but, as you did command,
Oph. O my lord, my lord, i have been so affrighted!
Oph. O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
Perchance 'twill walk again.
Perpend.
Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go. Exeunt.
Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
Mar. Lord hamlet!
Mar. Let's follow. 'tis not fit thus to obey him.
Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
My tables! Meet it is i set it down
Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
Mar. Nor i, my lord- in faith.
Mar. Something is rotten in the state of denmark.
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
Never to speak of this that you have heard:
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
On fortune's cap we are not the very button.
Oph. 'tis in my memory lock'd,
Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
Oph. Good my lord,
Oph. I do not know, my lord, what i should think,
Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
Oph. My lord, he hath importun'd me with love
Oph. My lord, i have remembrances of yours
Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him!
Oph. My lord?
Oph. No more but so?
Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!
Oph. So please you, something touching the lord hamlet.
Oph. What means your lordship?
Pol. And the queen too, and that presently.
Pol. 'and in part him, but, ' you may say, 'not well.
Pol. Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
Pol. At such a time i'll loose my daughter to him.
Pol. Away, i do beseech you, both away
Player. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us, sir.
Pol. And let him ply his music.
Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!
Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
Pol. My lord, i have news to tell you.
Pol. Upon my honour-
Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen!
Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- hercules and his load too.
Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him.
Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
Scene iii.
Sound a flourish. [enter trumpets and kettledrums. Danish
That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling
The fair ophelia! - nymph, in thy orisons
Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
These hands are not more like.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
You are welcome, masters; welcome, all. - i am glad to see thee
Yet i,
Would i had met my dearest foe in heaven
You cannot speak of reason to the dane
You laying these slight sullies on my son
You must not put another scandal on him,
a damn'd defeat was made. Am i a coward?
a dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
You told us of some suit. What is't, laertes?
a blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-
a fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
a broken voice, and his whole function suiting
a little month, or ere those shoes were old
a heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
a sable silver'd.
a savageness in unreclaimed blood,
a scullion!
according to the phrase or the addition
abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
affront ophelia.
a silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
about her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
against yourself. I know you are no truant.
affectation; but call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as
all welcome. We'll e'en to't like french falconers, fly at
and bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
almost to jelly with the act of fear,
altitude of a chopine. Pray god your voice, like a piece of
an understanding simple and unschool'd;
and bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
and after we will both our judgments join
and at the sound it shrunk in haste away
and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.
and bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
and by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-
and can say nothing! No, not for a king,
and cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
Pol. Do you know me, my lord?
Pol. Farewell!
Pol. Hath there been such a time- i would fain know that-
Pol. Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful. [reads. ]
Pol. Honest, my lord?
Pol. I have, my lord.
Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
Pol. Mad for thy love?
Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Pol. Fare you well, my lord.
Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the king.
Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
Pol. Give him this money and these notes, reynaldo.
Pol. Have i, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
Pol. Indeed, that is out o' th' air. [aside] how pregnant sometimes
Pol. It shall do well. But yet do i believe
Pol. Th' ambassadors from norway, my good lord,
Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
Pol. Madam, i swear i use no art at all.
Pol. Not i, my lord.
Pol. Marry, well bethought!
Pol. That hath made him mad.
Pol. That's very true, my lord.
Pol. This business is well ended.
Pol. The time invites you. Go, your servants tend.
Pol. What do you think of me?
Pol. What is the matter, my lord?
Pol. What is't, ophelia, he hath said to you?
Pol. What said he?
Pol. Yet here, laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
Pol. With what, i' th' name of god i
Pol. You go to seek the lord hamlet. There he is.
Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together
Pol. [aside] though this be madness, yet there is a method in't. -
Pol. You shall do marvell's wisely, good reynaldo,
Pol. [aside] how say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet
Pol. [points to his head and shoulder] take this from this, if this
Queen. Ay, amen!
Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,
Queen. More matter, with less art.
Rey. As gaming, my lord.
Rey. I will, my lord.
Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.
Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
Rey. My lord, i did intend it.
Rey. Well, my lord.
Ros. Both your majesties
Queen. It may be, very like.
Queen. So he does indeed.
Queen. Thanks, guildenstern and gentle rosencrantz.
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
Scene ii.
Scene iv.
Scene v.
This must not be. ' and then i prescripts gave her,
The very place puts toys of desperation,
So oft it chances in particular men
What might you think? No, i went round to work
This heavy-headed revel east and west
What does this mean, my lord?
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
all given to mine ear.
Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
Ros. My most dear lord!
Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
Ros. Neither, my lord.
Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
Ros. No indeed are they not.
Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
Ros. Then is the world one.
Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
Ros. To what end, my lord?
Ros. Truly, and i hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that
Ros. We think not so, my lord.
Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'tis too narrow for your
Ros. [to polonius] god save you, sir!
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
a serpent stung me. So the whole ear of denmark
Yea, from the table of my memory
and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
all saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
Swear by my sword.
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
There are more things in heaven and earth, horatio,
There, my lord.
This above all- to thine own self be true,
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
a man that fortune's buffets and rewards
against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
and could of men distinguish, her election
and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
and each particular hair to stand an end
and fall a-cursing like a very drab,
amble, and you lisp; you nickname god's creatures and make your
and for the day confin'd to fast in fires,
and gather by him, as he is behav'd,
and gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
and he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties
and he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
and here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
and i do think- or else this brain of mine
Ros. [aside to guildenstern] what say you?
Scene ii.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
This must be known; which, being kept close, might move
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
Whereon old norway, overcome with joy,
We heard it all. - my lord, do as you please;
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
You need not tell us what lord hamlet said.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
Say, voltemand, what from our brother norway?
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain
This is the very ecstasy of love,
Thus was i, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Volt. Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes.
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
a couch for luxury and damned incest.
a violet in the youth of primy nature,
and a most instant tetter bark'd about,
addicted so and so'; and there put on him
and convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
against their own succession.
and curd, like eager droppings into milk,
and draw you into madness? Think of it.
and drive his purpose on to these delights.
Welcome, my good friends.
action how like an angel! In apprehension how like a god! The
air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical
all my smooth body.
and all we mourn for.
and at our more consider'd time we'll read,
and bring these gentlemen where hamlet is.
and end his being. That done, he lets me go,
and enterprises of great pith and moment
and his commission to employ those soldiers,
and for my soul, what can it do to that,
and for your part, ophelia, i do wish
and hears it roar beneath.
and he not from his reason fall'n thereon
and in the porches of my ears did pour
and makes each petty artire in this body
and more above, hath his solicitings,
and my young mistress thus i did bespeak:
and pity 'tis 'tis true. A foolish figure!
and prey on garbage.
and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go
and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
and how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
and i believe it is a fetch of warrant.
and i do doubt the hatch and the disclose
and i with them the third night kept the watch;
and in the morn and liquid dew of youth
and keep you in the rear of your affection,
and lose the name of action. - soft you now!
and it must follow, as the night the day,
and let thine eye look like a friend on denmark.
and lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, laertes,
and my imaginations are as foul
and makes us rather bear those ills we have
and never did the cyclops' hammers fall
and now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
and that in way of caution- i must tell you
and the king's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
and our vain blows malicious mockery.
and passion in the gods. '
and pious action we do sugar o'er
and recks not his own rede.
and scape detecting, i will pay the theft.
and then, you know,
and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were
and therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd
and there assume some other, horrible form
and there did seem in him a kind of joy
and then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
and they in france of the best rank and station
and thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
and thus the native hue of resolution
and thy best graces spend it at thy will!
and i'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
and in part him. ' do you mark this, reynaldo?
and much offence too. Touching this vision here,
and since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,
and lay your hands again upon my sword.
and leads the will to desperate undertakings
and meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!
and still your fingers on your lips, i pray.
and sure i am two men there are not living
and thrice his head thus waving up and down,
and thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
and thy commandment all alone shall live
and with no less nobility of love
aroused vengeance sets him new awork;
as 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
'as by lot, god wot, '
as hardy as the nemean lion's nerve.
as he in his particular act and place
as hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
and to the last bended their light on me.
and we beseech you, bend you to remain
and what so poor a man as hamlet is
and, as i think, they have already order
and with them words of so sweet breath compos'd
and, like a neutral to his will and matter,
and vanish'd from our sight.
answer, and think upon this business.
anything we see. We'll have a speech straight. Come, give us a
as are companions noted and most known
are burnt and purg'd away. But that i am forbid
as i do thee. Something too much of this i
(as i perceiv'd it, i must tell you that,
as if increase of appetite had grown
as if it some impartment did desire
as low as to the fiends!
as may dishonour him- take heed of that;
as made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,
as of a father; for let the world take note
as therein are set down.
and to the manner born, it is a custom
and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
and we did think it writ down in our duty
and with a sudden vigour it doth posset
appears before them and with solemn march
armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
as he is very potent with such spirits,
and whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
and with a look so piteous in purport
and you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
as any the most vulgar thing to sense,
and, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
as he would draw it. Long stay'd he so.
as if he had been loosed out of hell
as in their birth, - wherein they are not guilty,
as infinite as man may undergo-
as needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
as thus, 'i know his father and his friends,
as to expend your time with us awhile
as watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
awake the god of day; and at his warning,
be otherwise.
be thy intents wicked or charitable,
been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
beck than i have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give
before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
and with a larger tether may he walk
and with his head over his shoulder turn'd
and you yourself shall keep the key of it.
appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
and, as he drains his draughts of rhenish down,
are joyfully return'd.
are most select and generous, chief in that.
are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
as 'well, well, we know, ' or 'we could, an if we would, '
as deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?
as e'er my conversation cop'd withal.
as fits a king's remembrance.
as it hath us'd to do- that i have found
(as i perchance hereafter shall think meet
as it is common for the younger sort
as one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;
as it behooves my daughter and your honour.
as it did seem to shatter all his bulk
as oft as any passion under heaven
as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet.
as vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;
as you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
at least i am sure it may be so in denmark. [writes. ]
as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to't.
attendants].
be all my sins rememb'red.
bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
be something scanter of your maiden presence.
be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
been struck so to the soul that presently
bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
before you visit him, to make inquire
being a thing immortal as itself?
being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your
believe so much in him, that he is young,
[exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern
better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with
blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
both to my god and to my gracious king;
bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
but answer made it none. Yet once methought
but bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
but do not dull thy palm with entertainment
but even then the morning cock crew loud,
but he's an arrant knave.
but i am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
but i have that within which passeth show-
but if you hold it fit, after the play
but let me hear from you.
but not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
by laboursome petition, and at last
but to my mind, though i am native here
calumny. Get thee to a nunnery. Go, farewell. Or if thou wilt
but you must know, your father lost a father;
but mere implorators of unholy suits,
chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a
city? Are they so follow'd?
confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
but better look'd into, he truly found
but from what cause he will by no means speak.
but in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
by what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
but truly i do fear it.
carried away. The poisoner wooes the queen with gifts; she
carrying torches.
comes in again, seem to condole with her. The dead body is
carrying, i say, the stamp of one defect,
dare scarce come thither.
contagious blastments are most imminent.
but keep a farm and carters.
but what, in faith, make you from wittenberg?
but with a crafty madness keeps aloof
but, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
by the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
by indirections find directions out.
by their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
by this encompassment and drift of question
clouts.
crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own
deserved at the hands of fortune that she sends you to prison
carve for himself, for on his choice depends
could force his soul so to his own conceit
cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
did nothing.
discourse to your beauty.
do not itself unkennel in one speech,
discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no
do i impart toward you. For your intent
do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
do not as some ungracious pastors do,
do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;
enquire me first what danskers are in paris;
doth all the noble substance often dout to his own scandal.
dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what
father?
doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
doth rend the region; so, after pyrrhus' pause,
dungeons, denmark being one o' th' worst.
drabbing. You may go so far.
elsinore.
enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father
epitaph is 'for o, for o, the hobby-horse is forgot! '
even with the very comment of thy soul
even in their promise, as it is a-making,
entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them
[exit polonius. ]
for the demand of our neglected tribute.
for bearers of this greeting to old norway,
eyes. Prithee no more!
for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again. - what do you
(for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can
[exit first player. ]
[exit queen. ]
extorted treasure in the womb of earth
faculties! In form and moving how express and admirable! In
farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
favours?
feather. I have of late- but wherefore i know not- lost all my
fay, i cannot reason.
fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
for every man hath business and desire,
for he himself is subject to his birth.
for murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
for i mine eyes will rivet to his face,
for it is as the air, invulnerable,
for loan oft loses both itself and friend,
for out o' doors he went without their help
for the apparel oft proclaims the man,
for the supply and profit of our hope,
for they are actions that a man might play;
as meditation or the thoughts of love,
as they fell out by time, by means, and place,
bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
but this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
black as his purpose, did the night resemble
but never doubt i love.
but that the dread of something after death-
but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
but with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
christians, nor the gait of christian, pagan, nor man, have so
devoutly to be wish'd. To die- to sleep.
discretion.
'doubt thou the stars are fire;
doubt that the sun doth move;
doubt truth to be a liar;
especially where he speaks of priam's slaughter. If it live in
form of the thing, each word made true and good,
from our achievements, though perform'd at height,
from whence though willingly i came to denmark
freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are
from fashion of himself. What think you on't?
gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as i may say)
before my daughter told me), what might you,
denmark? - what, my young lady and mistress? By'r lady, your
doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
for this effect defective comes by cause.
for we have closely sent for hamlet hither,
for what advancement may i hope from thee,
from the first corse till he that died to-day,
get from him why he puts on this confusion,
give it an understanding but no tongue.
for what we know must be, and is as common
(for which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
'gainst fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.
give me one poor request.
given private time to you, and you yourself
giving more light than heat, extinct in both
giving to you no further personal power
given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you
goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
gone, far gone! And truly in my youth i suff'red much extremity
form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though
forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;
from me, whose love was of that dignity
from that particular fault. The dram of e'il
gentleman. '
[ghost beckons. ]
[gives a paper. ]
god willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;
gonzago'?
gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee
good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you
'good sir, ' or so, or 'friend, ' or 'gentleman'-
grating so harshly all his days of quiet
grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance
grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
had he the motive and the cue for passion
grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
guildenstern, and other lords attendant, with the guard
had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
ham. 'the mobled queen'?
half a year. But, by'r lady, he must build churches then; or else
ham. O god!
ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
ham. Then came each actor on his ass-
ham. [aside] a little more than kin, and less than kind!
hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws
hath scald thee for herself. For thou hast been
have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre
hamlet. '
hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those
hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd
have not craft enough to colour. I know the good king and queen
have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes
have by the very cunning of the scene
have sent for you.
have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
hautboys play. The dumb show enters.
have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and
have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
humanity so abominably.
have you so slander any moment leisure
he seem'd to find his way without his eyes,
here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
his access to me.
his canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O god! God!
honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
i chiefly lov'd. 'twas aeneas' tale to dido, and thereabout of it
hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
i could a tale unfold whose lightest word
i say, away! - go on. I'll follow thee.
i will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
if i had play'd the desk or table book,
having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
he closes with you in this consequence:
he falls to such perusal of my face
he hath not fail'd to pester us with message
hecuba.
holds such an enmity with blood of man
here in the lobby.
history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
i'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
i made to her in marriage, and to decline
in general synod take away her power;
in going back to school in wittenberg,
'in her excellent white bosom, these, &c. '
he knew me not at first. He said i was a fishmonger. He is far
he rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound
heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
he tells me, my dear gertrude, he hath found
help to hasten them?
hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief
heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' court? For, by my
him and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation
him and my daughter. - my honourable lord, i will most humbly take
him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
his father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
his further gait herein, in that the levies,
his greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
his love.
his nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
in dreadful secrecy impart they did,
i' th' university, you say?
in censure of his seeming.
in mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
in obstinate condolement is a course
in filial obligation for some term
in this distracted globe. Remember thee?
in the dead vast and middle of the night
is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
it lifted up it head and did address
it shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
into the madness wherein now he raves,
inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you
is by a forged process of my death
is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
'it came to pass, as most like it was. '
it is most retrograde to our desire;
it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious
it was against your highness; whereat griev'd,
it waves you to a more removed ground.
it. Adieu.
journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
his replies are! A happiness that often madness hits on, which
hither?
holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;
honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
holding a weak supposal of our worth,
how does your honour for this many a day?
how strange or odd soe'er i bear myself
i cannot dream of. I entreat you both
hunts not the trail of policy so sure
i did repel his letters and denied
i have in quick determination
i had not quoted him. I fear'd he did but trifle
i have sworn't.
i hold my duty as i hold my soul,
'i saw him enter such a house of sale, '
i should have fatted all the region kites
i hold it fit that we shake hands and part;
i know my course. The spirit that i have seen
i would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
i would know that.
i'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
i'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,
i'll visit you.
i'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
if she unmask her beauty to the moon.
if with too credent ear you list his songs,
if you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
in equal scale weighing delight and dole,
in my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
importing the surrender of those lands
in honourable fashion.
in thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
innovation.
insert in't, could you not?
if't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me- no, nor woman
it fits your wisdom so far to believe it
it is 'adieu, adieu! Remember me. '
it is a damned ghost that we have seen,
it is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.
itself to motion, like as it would speak;
kill'd me.
keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
king of infinite space, were it not that i have bad dreams.
it is but a shadow's shadow.
king, father, royal dane. O, answer me?
kissing carrion- have you a daughter?
ladyship is nearer to heaven than when i saw you last by the
know a hawk from a handsaw.
leaves him. The queen returns, finds the king dead, and makes
lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
let his queen mother all alone entreat him
let it be tenable in your silence still;
let me be no assistant for a state,
let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman! -
let us impart what we have seen to-night
life,
like john-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
like niobe, all tears- why she, even she
like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;
little. 'sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
'lord hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
lost by his father, with all bands of law,
lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
love passing well.
make mad the guilty and appal the free,
make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
look you, i'll go pray.
lord hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,
make you at elsinore?
makes vow before his uncle never more
make you ready.
making night hideous, and we fools of nature
man is twice a child.
(marcellus and bernardo) on their watch
march. [enter king, queen, polonius, ophelia, rosencrantz,
mark you,
may give his saying deed; which is no further
may sweep to my revenge.
me, whether you were sent for or no.
me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.
lords attendant.
makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;
married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
may be a devil; and the devil hath power
may do t' express his love and friending to you,
me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are
might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
mind.
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.
mine.
more grief to hide than hate to utter love.
mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so
more honour'd in the breach than the observance.
more than his father's death, that thus hath put him
must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words
my lord, not i.
my leave of you.
not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,
of hamlet's transformation. So i call it,
not of that dye which their investments show,
now i am alone.
of hamlet's wildness. So shall i hope your virtues
of his affection to me.
most free in his reply.
more relative than this. The play's the thing
most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
must give us pause. There's the respect
must render up myself.
my custom always of the afternoon,
my good friends, i'll leave you till night. You are welcome to
my father's brother, but no more like my father
my thoughts and wishes bend again toward france
my too much changed son. - go, some of you,
no jocund health that denmark drinks to-day
no fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,
no hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
no more.
no reckoning made, but sent to my account
no more; and by a sleep to say we end
no traveller returns- puzzles the will,
nor any unproportion'd thought his act.
no, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
nor customary suits of solemn black,
nor the dejected havior of the visage,
nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of
nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
neck. He lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She, seeing
needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what
nor shall you do my ear that violence
not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
nowhere but in's own house. Farewell.
o'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
o'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,
occasion smiles upon a second leave.
of all their conference. If she find him not,
of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware
of general assault.
of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
of his true state.
of impious stubbornness. 'tis unmanly grief;
of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd;
of man and country-
not off.
nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as i
not.
now falls on priam.
now is be total gules, horridly trick'd
now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
now wears his crown.
(o god! A beast that wants discourse of reason
'o dear ophelia, i am ill at these numbers; i have not art to
o wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
o, speak!
o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that i
of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a
of reverend priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.
of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now
old grandsire priam seeks. '
of his behaviour.
ophelia, '-
or if it was, not above once; for the play, i remember, pleas'd
or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
of these dilated articles allow. [gives a paper. ]
on fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
on mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
'one fair daughter, and no more,
of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
on such regards of safety and allowance
oph. My lord, as i was sewing in my closet,
oph. No, my lord.
or 'if we list to speak, ' or 'there be, an if they might, '
or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
or bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
or ever i had seen that day, horatio!
or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
or look'd upon this love with idle sight?
or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
or my dear majesty your queen here, think,
our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
or rather say, the cause of this defect,
or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
or such ambiguous giving out, to note
or thinking by our late dear brother's death
or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
our hasty sending. Something have you heard
out of his subject; and we here dispatch
out of my weakness and my melancholy,
out of the shot and danger of desire.
pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
passing through nature to eternity.
passionate action. The poisoner with some three or four mutes,
philosophy could find it out.
pick'd out of ten thousand.
pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.
phrase.
plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
players do, i had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do
pol. Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's
pleasant and helpful to him!
pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
pol. [aside] still on my daughter.
promise-cramm'd. You cannot feed capons so.
question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous
put your dread pleasures more into command
rankly abus'd. But know, thou noble youth,
pyrrhus at priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
[reads] the letter.
piece of work is a man! How noble in reason! How infinite in
play something like the murther of my father
pol. Marry, i will teach you! Think yourself a baby
pol. Observe his inclination in yourself.
pol. Wherefore should you do this?
pol. At 'closes in the consequence'- ay, marry!
plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
pol. Ophelia, walk you here. - gracious, so please you,
polonius, laertes and his sister ophelia, [voltemand, cornelius, ]
possess it merely. That it should come to this!
prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a
read, my lord?
rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
receives rebuke from norway, and, in fine,
revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
repugnant to command. Unequal match'd,
rey. Very good, my lord.
rome-
roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing
scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts
seek for thy noble father in the dust.
sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet i could accuse
since nature cannot choose his origin, -
shall in the general censure take corruption
seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
[sits down at ophelia's feet. ]
so horridly to shake our disposition
question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,
queen. Came this from hamlet to her?
receiv'd his love?
resembles that it was. What it should be,
reckon my groans; but that i love thee best, o most best, believe
reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
[reads. ]
receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
reputation and profit, was better both ways.
rey. My lord, i have.
rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, i am most
seem to me all the uses of this world!
seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the
set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said
shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose
shall you my son. You have me, have you not
should be old as i am if, like a crab, you could go backward.
she married. O, most wicked speed, to post
show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing
sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow
sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
sir, though i most powerfully and potently believe, yet i hold it
so much from th' understanding of himself,
sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
so, proceed you.
some little time; so by your companies
speak to me.
sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
so grace and mercy at your most need help you,
so hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
so levied as before, against the polack;
soil our addition; and indeed it takes
soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
so much as from occasion you may glean,
striking too short at greeks. His antique sword,
swear by my sword.
sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in't
strutted and bellowed that i have thought some of nature's
take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
taste of your quality. Come, a passionate speech.
tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who
tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like
tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
than is the throne of denmark to thy father.
than i to hercules. Within a month,
so lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
so to seduce! - won to his shameful lust
speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them
speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which i would set down and
speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
so, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
sprung from neglected love. - how now, ophelia?
spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary
stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
still am i call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
strumpet. What news ?
than is my deed to my most painted word.
than that which dearest father bears his son
such as it is; and for my own poor part,
taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
takes prisoner pyrrhus' ear. For lo! His sword,
temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
termagant. It out-herods herod. Pray you avoid it.
th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless ilium,
than fly to others that we know not of?
than to entreaty.
that beetles o'er his base into the sea,
'that can denote me truly. These indeed seem,
that father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
suit of sables. O heavens! Die two months ago, and not forgotten
swear.
'swounds, i should take it! For it cannot be
t' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
take these again; for to the noble mind
taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd
t' have seen what i have seen, see what i see!
take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall
th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
th' observ'd of all observers- quite, quite down!
th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
than a command to parley. For lord hamlet,
than your particular demands will touch it.
that ever i was born to set it right!
that does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
that flesh is heir to. 'tis a consummation
than may be given you. In few, ophelia,
than the main voice of denmark goes withal.
that guilty creatures, sitting at a play,
that he is open to incontinency.
that he, as 'twere by accident, may here
that i have longed long to re-deliver.
that i, the son of a dear father murther'd,
that it went hand in hand even with the vow
that grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
that he might not beteem the winds of heaven
that he should weep for her? What would he do,
that i have? He would drown the stage with tears
that i have positively said ''tis so, '
that i will speak to thee. I'll call thee hamlet,
that is not passion's slave, and i will wear him
that it might please you to give quiet pass
that lend a tyrannous and a damned light
that looks so many fadoms to the sea
that makes calamity of so long life.
Exit [polonius].
Exit ghost.
Exit ghost.
Exit horatio.
Exit.
Exit messenger.
Exit.
Exit.
Exit.
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
Fare you well, my dove!
For if the king like not the comedy,
Farewell, dear mother.
Follow my mother. King dies.
For me, with sorrow i embrace my fortune.
For thou dost know, o damon dear,
For. Go softly on.
For my part, i do not lie in't, yet it is mine.
Fort. Let four captains
Fort. Let us haste to hear it,
Fort. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
Fran. Bernardo hath my place.
For. Go, captain, from me greet the danish king.
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
Fort. Where is this sight?
Fortinbras, prince of norway.
Fran. Bernardo?
Fran. For this relief much thanks. 'tis bitter cold,
Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour.
Gentlemen. (within) hamlet! Lord hamlet!
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Fran. I think i hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
Fran. Give you good night.
Fran. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Fran. Not a mouse stirring.
Francisco, a soldier
Gent. She is importunate, indeed distract.
Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears
Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
Getrude, queen of denmark, mother to hamlet.
Give us the foils. Come on.
Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
Good night, mother.
Guil. We will ourselves provide.
Guildenstern, courtier.
Ghost of hamlet's father.
Give you good night. Exit.
Ham. 'by-and-by' is easily said. - leave me, friends.
Ham. 'swounds, show me what thou't do.
Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
Ham. (within) mother, mother, mother!
Ham. 'the mousetrap. ' marry, how? Tropically. This play is the
Ham. 'tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier
Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
Ham. A king of shreds and patches! -
Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
Ham. A whole one i!
Give him the cup.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
God 'a'mercy on his soul!
Guil. Believe me, i cannot.
Guil. But these cannot i command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
God bless you, sir!
Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start
Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
Guil. No, my lord; rather with choler.
Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
Guil. Is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.
Guil. My lord, i cannot.
Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
Guil. The king, sir-
Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
Guil. The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
Ham. Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
Ham. An earnest conjuration from the king,
Guil. What, my lord?
Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
Ham. And smelt so? Pah!
Ham. As woman's love.
Ham. At supper.
Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
Ham. Ay, or any show that you'll show him. Be not you asham'd to
Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into england?
Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the king's countenance, his rewards,
Ham. But soft! What noise? Who calls on hamlet? O, here they come.
Ham. But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
Ham. Come for the third, laertes! You but dally.
Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge i
Ham. Do not believe it.
Ham. Do you see nothing there?
Ham. As th'art a man,
Ham. Being thus benetted round with villanies,
Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
Ham. Come on, sir.
Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-
Ham. Dost thou think alexander look'd o' this fashion i' th' earth?
Ham. Ecstasy?
Ham. Goes it against the main of poland, sir,
Ham. For england?
Ham. Good madam!
Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?
Ham. Good.
Ham. How purpos'd, sir, i pray you?
Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
Ham. He did comply with his dug before he suck'd it. Thus has he,
Ham. He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. His name's gonzago.
Ham. Hear you, sir!
Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.
Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned dane,
Ham. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
Ham. How came he mad?
Ham. How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
Ham. How does the queen?
Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.
Ham. I embrace it freely,
Ham. I do beseech you.
Ham. How if i answer no?
Ham. How long is that since?
Ham. How strangely?
Ham. I am constant to my purposes; they follow the king's pleasure.
Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, if i could see
Ham. I lov'd ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for england!
Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into france i have been in
Ham. I am tame, sir; pronounce.
Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
Ham. I humbly thank you, sir. [aside to horatio] dost know this
Ham. I pray you.
Ham. I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.
Ham. I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your
Ham. I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.
Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,
Ham. I'll be your foil, laertes. In mine ignorance
Ham. If she should break it now!
Ham. In happy time.
Ham. Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.
Ham. Judgment!
Ham. Let me see. [takes the skull. ] alas, poor yorick! I knew him,
Ham. Madam, how like you this play?
Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. But, sir, such
Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
Ham. Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.
Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
Ham. Nay come! Again! The queen falls.
Ham. Nay, i know not.
Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
Ham. No, by this bad.
Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in
Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
Ham. O good horatio, i'll take the ghost's word for a thousand
Ham. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
Ham. O, i die, horatio!
Ham. Of him, sir.
Ham. Or like a whale.
Ham. One.
Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say 'good morrow, sweet lord!
Ham. She well instructs me.
Ham. Sir, a whole history.
Ham. Sir, i cannot.
Ham. Sir, i lack advancement.
Ham. Sir, i will walk here in the hall. If it please his majesty,
Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
Ham. So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.
Ham. So you must take your husbands. - begin, murtherer. Pox, leave
Ham. No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
Ham. O, but she'll keep her word.
Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, i
Ham. That is laertes,
Ham. That's two of his weapons- but well.
Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could
Ham. The point envenom'd too?
Ham. Then will i come to my mother by-and-by. - they fool me to the
Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
Ham. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
Ham. They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I
Ham. This?
Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'tis for
Ham. Thou pray'st not well.
Ham. To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
Ham. To what base uses we may return, horatio! Why may not
Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?
Ham. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Ham. Up from my cabin,
Ham. Upon what ground?
Ham. What call you the carriages?
Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman
Ham. Whose was it?
Ham. What's his weapon?
Ham. What, the fair ophelia?
Ham. Yours, yours. [exit osric. ] he does well to commend it
Ham. Who commands them, sir?
Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
Osr. I commend my duty to your lordship.
Ham. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
Ham. Why he more than another?
Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
Ham. [aside to horatio] thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a
Ham. Why, then the polack never will defend it.
Ham. [comes forward] what is he whose grief
Hor [aside to hamlet] is't not possible to understand in another
Hor. 'twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.
Hor. Ay, good my lord.
Hor. Good my lord, be quiet.
Hor. E'en so.
Hor. How was this seal'd?
Hor. I beseech you.
Hor. So guildenstern and rosencrantz go to't.
Hor. Is't possible?
Hor. Peace! Who comes here?
Hor. Why, what a king is this!
Hor. It must be shortly known to him from england
Hor. Remember it, my lord!
Hor. What's that, my lord?
Hor. [aside to hamlet] i knew you must be edified by the margent
Hor. [aside] his purse is empty already. All's golden words are
Hor. [aside to hamlet] no, my good lord.
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
I had my father's signet in my purse,
I lov'd you ever. But it is no matter.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
If you do meet horatio and marcellus,
I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?
Imperious caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
King. I pray thee, good horatio, wait upon him.
King. Pluck thein asunder.
King. O, he is mad, laertes.
Laer. O, treble woe
Laer. The devil take thy soul!
Laer. Lay her i' th' earth;
Let hercules himself do what he may,
Lords, ladies, officers, soldiers, sailors, messengers, attendants.
Marcellus, officer.
Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Ophelia, daughter to polonius.
Osr. I know you are not ignorant-
Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
Osr. Rapier and dagger.
Osr. Shall i redeliver you e'en so?
Laer. Must there no more be done?
Laer. What ceremony else?
Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
Osr. The king, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, i should impart
Osr. The king, sir, hath wager'd with him six barbary horses;
Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to denmark.
Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence laertes is-
Players.
Queen. For love of god, forbear him!
Leaps in the grave.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead
Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- i cannot
Osr. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
Osric, courtier.
Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd
Queen. Hamlet, hamlet!
Priest. No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
Queen. O my son, what theme?
Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
Scene. - elsinore.
To pay five ducats, five, i would not farm it;
They are not near my conscience; their defeat
Queen. This is mere madness;
Scene ii.
Two clowns, gravediggers.
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
We'll put the matter to the present push. -
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
What is the reason that you use me thus?
Woo't drink up esill? Eat a crocodile?
Woo't weep? Woo't fight? Woo't fast? Woo't tear thyself?
Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
You do remember all the circumstance?
a thing to you from his majesty.
a very noble youth. Mark.
a baseness to write fair, and labour'd much
a chough; but, as i say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
a ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
against the which he has impon'd, as i take it, six french
alexander was buried, alexander returneth into dust; the dust is
a minist'ring angel shall my sister be
and a man's life is no more than to say 'one. '
and i am sick at heart.
and from her fair and unpolluted flesh
Ham. Very well, my lord.
Ham. We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel;
Ham. What man dost thou dig it for?
Ham. What woman then?
Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
Ham. What, frighted with false fire?
Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
Ham. Why, e'en so! And now my lady worm's, chapless, and knock'd
He never gave commandment for their death.
Ham. Why?
Here, hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.
Ham. [aside] wormwood, wormwood!
Hor. Friends to this ground.
Hor. Half a share.
Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
Hor. I did very well note him.
Hor. Nay, good my lord -
Hor. Not from his mouth,
Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
Hor. Of that i shall have also cause to speak,
Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
Hor. Very well, my lord.
Hor. Well, sit we down,
Hor. What is it you will see?
Hor. You might have rhym'd.
How now, sweet queen?
I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.
If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
I cannot live to hear the news from england,
If there be any good thing to be done,
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
King. 'tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
King. Come, hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
Ham. Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
Ham. You are welcome.
Ham. With drink, sir?
Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to
Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake
Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
Hor. Ay, my lord, and of calveskins too.
Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.
Hor. Never believe it.
Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
I am dead, horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
Hor. A piece of him.
Here's yet some liquor left.
Hor. Ay, my lord.
Hor. Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.
Hor. In what particular thought to work i know not;
Hor. It might, my lord.
Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
Horatio, friend to hamlet.
If hamlet from himself be taken away,
I am more an antique roman than a dane.
If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
It is a poison temper'd by himself.
King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
King. Full thirty times hath phoebus' cart gone round
King. Give them the foils, young osric. Cousin hamlet,
King. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?
King. I do not fear it, i have seen you both;
King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
How dost thou, good lord? ' this might be my lord such-a-one, that
How much i had to do to calm his rage i
I bought an unction of a mountebank,
I can no more. The king, the king's to blame.
I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze
I'll cross it, though it blast me. - stay illusion!
King. Gertrude, do not drink.
If hamlet give the first or second hit,
King. I do believe you think what now you speak;
King. The very same.
If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, i will do
If that his majesty would aught with us,
King. Give me some light! Away!
King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
King. Faith, i must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
In thee there is not half an hour of life.
Laer. I am satisfied in nature,
King. He made confession of you;
Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed
Laer. He is justly serv'd.
In youth when i did love, did love,
King. A norman.
King. I do not think't.
Laer. A norman was't?
Laer. Upon my life, lamound.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
Mar. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
Lord. My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young osric, who
Lord. The king and queen and all are coming down.
Lord. The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to
Mar. And liegemen to the dane.
Mar. Holla, bernardo!
Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.
Marcellus, officer.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
None wed the second but who killed the first.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know;
King. Let's follow, gertrude.
King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?
King. No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;
King. Not that i think you did not love your father;
King. Part them! They are incens'd.
King. She sounds to see them bleed.
Laer. Come, one for me.
Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, osric.
Laer. Have at you now!
King. Thy loving father, hamlet.
Laer. [aside] and yet it is almost against my conscience.
My spirits grow dull, and fain i would beguile
Near elsinore.
Now, out of this-
King. What do you call the play?
King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?
Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.
Laer. To cut his throat i' th' church!
Laer. Say you so? Come on. Play.
Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor ophelia,
Laer. You mock me, sir.
Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
Mar. Peace! Break thee off! Look where it comes again!
Mar. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, horatio.
O good horatio, what a wounded name
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
Oph. 'tis brief, my lord.
Oph. Still better, and worse.
Oph. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
Oph. The king rises.
Oph. What means this, my lord?
Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
Oph. Will he tell us what this show meant?
Oph. You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.
Osr. Ay, my good lord.
Osr. Nothing neither way.
Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.
Osr. How is't, laertes?
Other. Marry, now i can tell!
Other. Mass, i cannot tell.
Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
Osr. Young fortinbras, with conquest come from poland,
Other. Nay, but hear you, goodman delver!
Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand
Other. Why, 'tis found so.
Osr. Look to the queen there, ho!
Other. But is this law?
Other. Was he a gentleman?
Other. Why, he had none.
Other. Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a
Pol. I will say so. Exit.
Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
Pol. My lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.
Pol. Very like a whale.
Polonius, lord chamberlain.
Pours the poison in his ears.
Prepare to play.
Pray you pass with your best violence;
Pro. For us, and for our tragedy,
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
Queen. Drown'd, drown'd.
King. Let's further think of this,
King. Our son shall win.
King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
King. [aside] it is the poison'd cup; it is too late.
Laer. A touch, a touch; i do confess't.
Laer. Come, my lord. They play.
Laer. Drown'd! O, where?
Laer. I will do't!
Laer. Well, again!
Laer. My lord, i'll hit him now.
Laer. No.
Laertes, son to polonius.
Mar. Question it, horatio.
Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.
Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face.
Queen. He's fat, and scant of breath.
Pol. Give o'er the play.
Queen. How fares my lord?
Queen. I will, my lord; i pray you pardon me. Drinks.
Queen. No, no! The drink, the drink! O my dear hamlet!
Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
Sir, in this audience,
Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
Queen. Sleep rock thy brain,
Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon
Queen. The instances that second marriage move
Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself
Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
Scene iv.
Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
Rosencrantz, courtier.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
Spreads his arms.
Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
Tell him that by his license fortinbras
That i distrust you. Yet, though i distrust,
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it christian burial.
The story is extant, and written in very choice italian. You
This is one lucianus, nephew to the king.
The drink, the drink! I am poison'd. [dies. ]
The ears are senseless that should give us bearing
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
The violence of either grief or joy
This presence knows,
Voltemand, courtier.
Throws up [another skull].
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,
The end
The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings-
What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
Was't hamlet wrong'd laertes? Never hamlet.
When in your motion you are hot and dry-
When second husband let me be accurst!
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
The scripture says adam digg'd. Could he dig without arms? I'll
The queen carouses to thy fortune, hamlet.
Then, venom, to thy work. Hurts the king.
There lives within the very flame of love
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
Treachery! Seek it out.
Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
Where should we have our thanks?
Who is't that can inform me?
Will return'd shall know you are come home.
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
a chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
Your grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
There with fantastic garlands did she come
Therefore i have entreated him along,
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
Who hath reliev'd you?
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
a face without a heart, '
a kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
a pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and
a sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,
a thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
a very, very- pajock.
about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution,
about the world have times twelve thirties been,
absent thee from felicity awhile,
act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
after the danish sword, and thy free awe
amazement and admiration.
and hath abatements and delays as many
and in the cup an union shall he throw
and let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
an anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They
and as my love is siz'd, my fear is so.
and call the noblest to the audience.
and ever three parts coward, - i do not know
and do such bitter business as the day
and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
and for your rapier most especially,
and from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
and foreign mart for implements of war;
and let us hear bernardo speak of this.
and nothing is at a like goodness still;
and prologue to the omen coming on,
and set a double varnish on the fame
and that he calls for drink, i'll have prepar'd him
and gave you such a masterly report
and gem of all the nation.
and hath shipped me intil the land,
and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock
and hurt my brother.
and let him know so.
and hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
and let me speak to the yet unknowing world
and in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
and let us once again assail your ears,
and many more of the same bevy that i know the drossy age dotes
and many such-like as's of great charge,
and not have strew'd thy grave.
and our affairs from england come too late.
and prais'd be rashness for it; let us know,
and spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
and stand a comma 'tween their amities,
and that i see, in passages of proof,
and that our drift look through our bad performance.
and therefore i forbid my tears; but yet
and then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
Ham. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
Ham. How is it with you, lady?
Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
Ham. Nay, but to live
Ham. Nay, i know not. Is it the king?
Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
Ham. I must to england; you know that?
Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?
Ham. Not this, by no means, that i bid you do:
Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain
Ham. Now might i do it pat, now he is praying;
Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
Ham. Such an act
Ham. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!
Ham. Safely stow'd.
Ham. The body is with the king, but the king is not with the body.
Ham. That i can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
Ham. There's letters seal'd; and my two schoolfellows,
Ham. What's the matter now?
Ham. [draws] how now? A rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
He is gone, he is gone,
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,
Help, help, ho!
His means of death, his obscure funeral-
Hor. Let him bless thee too.
Hor. (reads the letter) 'horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd
Hor. Let them come in.
Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
Hor. That can i.
Hor. What are they that would speak with me?
Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
How now o what hath befall'n?
I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the french,
I pray you go with me.
I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room. -
If by direct or by collateral hand
King. 'tis hamlet's character. 'naked! '
In the corrupted currents of this world
King. A very riband in the cap of youth-
King. Alas, alas!
King. At supper? Where?
King. It falls right.
King. Arm you, i pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
King. Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
King. Bring him before us.
King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
King. But where is he?
King. Now, hamlet, where's polonius?
King. So you shall;
King. There's matter in these sighs. These profound heaves
King. What dost thou mean by this?
Laer. It well appears. But tell me
Laer. Know you the hand?
Laer. Let this be so.
Mar. It is offended.
May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
No.
King. Go seek him there. [to attendants. ]
King. O, for two special reasons,
King. [rises] my words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
Mar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
Oph. (sings)
Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Pol. [behind] o, i am slain!
Pol. [behind] what, ho! Help, help, help!
Queen. I will not speak with her.
Queen. Nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.
Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
Ros. Ho, guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
King. Laertes, i must commune with your grief,
King. Where is polonius?
Laer. Do you see this, o god?
Leave us.
Pray you be round with him.
Queen. As kill a king?
Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; i hear him coming.
Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
Laer. And so have i a noble father lost;
Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come!
Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?
Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Queen. Have you forgot me?
Sailor. 'a shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for you,
Sailor. God bless you, sir.
Queen. Why, how now, hamlet?
Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
Scene iv.
Scene v.
Scene vii.
Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
That cannot be; since i am still possess'd
Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!
Hamlet in madness hath polonius slain,
Her mood will needs be pitied.
Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear
His liberty is full of threats to all-
His beard was as white as snow,
His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
Hor. 'twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
Hor. As thou art to thyself.
Hor. Before my god, i might not this believe
Is not this something more than fantasy?
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
King. Dead.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
I dare damnation. To this point i stand,
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
I must be cruel, only to be kind;
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
In the most high and palmy state of rome,
How now? What news?
It had been so with us, had we been there.
It warms the very sickness in my heart
King. Conceit upon her father.
King. Ay, hamlet.
King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
King. O gertrude, come away!
King. Laertes, you shall hear them.
King. Pretty ophelia!
King. Thanks, dear my lord.
King. O heavy deed!
King. To thine own peace. If he be now return'd
King. The doors are broke.
King. What is the cause, laertes,
King. What, gertrude? How does hamlet?
King. Where are my switzers? Let them guard the door.
King. Why, now you speak
Laer. A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.
Laer. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
Laer. I pray you give me leave.
Laer. I thank you. Keep the door. [exeunt his followers. ]
Laer. My lord, i will be rul'd;
Laer. This nothing's more than matter.
Laer. That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;
Laer. To his good friends thus wide i'll ope my arms
Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
Laer. Where is my father?
Laer. Where is this king? - sirs, staid you all without.
Let him go, gertrude. Do not fear our person.
Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! Sit you down
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at
Most holy and religious fear it is
Mar. 'tis gone and will not answer.
Mar. Is it not like the king?
Mess. Save yourself, my lord:
Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; i saw them not.
My brother shall know of it; and so i thank you for your good
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
No, no, he is dead;
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
O heavens! Is't possible a young maid's wits
King. From hamlet? Who brought them?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
King. Good laertes,
King. How do you, pretty lady?
Laer. Ay my lord,
King. Who shall stay you?
King. Let him demand his fill.
King. Will you know them then?
Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:
Laer. My will, not all the world!
Laer. None but his enemies.
Laer. What part is that, my lord?
No more, sweet hamlet!
Mess. Letters, my lord, from hamlet:
O shame! Where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
O, ho!
O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
One word more, good lady.
O, say!
Oph. (sings)
O, step between her and her fighting soul
Oph. Say you? Nay, pray you mark.
Oph. Well, god dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.
Oph. Where is the beauteous majesty of denmark?
O, this is counter, you false danish dogs!
O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy. I
Oph. (sings)
Oph. (sings)
Oph. I hope all will be well. We must be patient; but i cannot
Oph. You must sing 'a-down a-down, and you call him a-down-a. ' o,
Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what
Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Queen. Alack,
Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, i'll make an end on't!
Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines. There's rue for you,
Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love,
Queen. Ay me, what act,
Scene iii.
Scene iii.
Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while.
See what a grace was seated on this brow;
The bark is ready and the wind at help,
They were given me by claudio; he receiv'd them
Queen. What have i done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
a combination and a form indeed
The queen's closet.
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days. Exit.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go. Exit.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife,
a brother's murther! Pray can i not,
a rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
a sister driven into desp'rate terms,
a station like the herald mercury
Queen. Alack, what noise is this?
Queen. Alas, how is't with you,
Queen. Alas, he's mad!
Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!
Queen. But not by him!
Queen. Let her come in.
Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!
Queen. Nay, but ophelia-
Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Queen. No more!
Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
Queen. Calmly, good laertes.
Queen. How now, ophelia?
Queen. O hamlet, speak no more!
Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is i see.
Queen. O, speak to me no more!
Queen. O hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
Queen. To whom do you speak this?
Queen. What shall i do?
Queen. What would she have?
Quoth she, 'before you tumbled me,
Ros. Believe what?
Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to
Ros. I understand you not, my lord.
Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
Scene ii.
So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
Such was the very armour he had on
Speak to her, hamlet.
That i am guiltless of your father's death,
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
The king is a thing-
What is the matter?
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
The terms of our estate may not endure
This bodiless creation ecstasy
What think you on't?
Young men will do't if they come to't
a noise within.
Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt
Speak, man.
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
a cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
a little ere the mightiest julius fell,
acts little of his will. Tell me, laertes,
again.
after the thing it loves.
against the which a moiety competent
alack, and fie for shame!
all from her father's death. O gertrude, gertrude,
all flaxen was his poll.
alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
an thou hadst not come to my bed. '
and am most sensibly in grief for it,
and (would it were not so! ) you are my mother.
an eye like mars, to threaten and command;
and batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes
and bear it to the chapel.
and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
and both neglect. What if this cursed hand
and call it accident.
and do not spread the compost on the weeds
and do't the speedier that you may direct me
Then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es
This man shall set me packing.
Where is your son?
You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
all in the morning bedtime,
among a mineral of metals base,
ah, mine own lord, what have i seen to-night!
and either [master] the devil, or throw him out
and for his death no wind
and blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
and break your own neck down.
and breath of life, i have no life to breathe
and carriage of the article design'd,
and dupp'd the chamber door,
and from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.
and he to england shall along with you.
and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' sundays.
and his sandal shoon.
and hit the woundless air. - o, come away!
and how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
and i a maid at your window,
and in a postscript here, he says 'alone. '
and i the matter will reword; which madness
and in his grave rain'd many a tear.
and in this brainish apprehension kills
and let them know both what we mean to do
and let all sleep, while to my shame i see
and let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
and let me wring your heart; for so i shall
and live the purer with the other half,
and makes as healthful music. It is not madness
and marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
and melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
and not where i had aim'd them.
and tell you what i know.
and that shall lend a kind of easiness
and sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
and that, i hope, will teach you to imagine-
and they can well on horseback; but this gallant
and think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
and to such wondrous doing brought his horse
and wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
and where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
and now i'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
and oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
and put it in his pocket!
and reason panders will.
and so am i reveng'd. That would be scann'd.
and terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
and that his soul may be as damn'd and black
and that in hamlet's hearing, for a quality
and when you are desirous to be blest,
and you must put me in your heart for friend,
and, like a man to double business bound,
and, as you said, and wisely was it said,
and that your grace hath screen'd and stood between
and there i see such black and grained spots
and they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
and waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
and thou must cure me. Till i know 'tis done,
and thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen
and thus a while the fit will work on him.
and wants not buzzers to infect his ear
and we shall jointly labour with your soul
and we cast away moan.
and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the
and what's untimely done. [so haply slander-]
and where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd,
and who in want a hollow friend doth try,
and will not let belief take hold of him
and, as the world were now but to begin,
and, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
answer is i can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,
and, england, if my love thou hold'st at aught, -
antiquity forgot, custom not known,
are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
and when he's not himself does wrong laertes,
and why such daily cast of brazen cannon
and will he not come again?
and, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
and will not wrong it.
and will this brother's wager frankly play.
and, in this upshot, purposes mistook
are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
and, but that great command o'ersways the order,
as checking at his voyage, and that he means
and with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience
and with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
and you must needs have heard, how i am punish'd
and, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
as kill a king, and marry with his brother.
as did that one; and that, in my regard,
as day does to your eye.
as false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed
as from the body of contraction plucks
(as how should it be so? How otherwise? ),
dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant hamlet
glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry
as it doth well appear unto our state,
but never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
as will not leave their tinct.
by desperate appliance are reliev'd,
first mouth'd, to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
guil. A thing, my lord?
deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son
did slay this fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
his authorities. But such officers do the king best service in
(for so this side of our known world esteem'd him)
of a king?
or not at all.
are shot off.
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make
are unwrung.
argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.
as by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.
as england was his faithful tributary,
as had he been incorps'd and demi-natur'd
as harbingers preceding still the fates
as hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
as if i had never been such.
as love between them like the palm might flourish,
as level as the cannon to his blank,
as make your bouts more violent to that end-
as my great power thereof may give thee sense,
as one incapable of her own distress,
as peace should still her wheaten garland wear
as stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
as there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
as to peace-parted souls.
as we have warranty. Her death was doubtful;
at gaming, swearing, or about some act
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the french
at his head a grass-green turf,
[aside] to my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)
be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
but greatly to find quarrel in a straw
but, like the owner of a foul disease,
bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
behind the arras hearing something stir,
both countenance and excuse. Ho, guildenstern!
but i will delve one yard below their mines
but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know;
but we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
but, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
by letters congruing to that effect,
craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your worm is your
did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
does not divide the sunday from the week.
doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?
end.
even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
he is dead and gone;
[exeunt all but hamlet. ]
for england.
if his chief good and market of his time
go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
how all occasions do inform against me
hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard
is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the
it spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
excitements of my reason and my blood,
[exeunt attendants. ]
ham. He will stay till you come.
[exit gentleman. ]
find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
indeed would make one think there might be thought,
for that which thou hast done, - must send thee hence
into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.
king. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety, -
looking before and after, gave us not
my thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth! Exit.
o'er whom his very madness, like some ore
of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
of thinking too precisely on th' event, -
one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for england!
only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and
should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt
shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.
[exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern. ]
[exit the queen. Then] exit hamlet, tugging in
exposing what is mortal and unsure
for 'tis the sport to have the enginer
for like the hectic in my blood he rages,
from another one?
had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
his fell to hamlet. Now, sir, young fortinbras,
he smote the sledded polacks on the ice.
i had forgot! 'tis so concluded on.
is not to stir without great argument,
how should i your true-love know
is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun. Exit.
led by a delicate and tender prince,
let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
mother, good night. - indeed, this counsellor
makes mouths at the invisible event,
nor will it yield to norway or the pole
of unimproved mettle hot and full,
or for some frontier?
our sovereign process, which imports at full,
pays homage to us, - thou mayst not coldly set
over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
polonius.
(sings) he is dead and gone, lady,
since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
ros. Will't please you go, my lord?
sith i have cause, and will, and strength, and means
so nightly toils the subject of the land,
such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
th' associates tend, and everything is bent
that capability and godlike reason
that carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
that else leans on th' affair. Pray you make haste.
that for a fantasy and trick of fame
that hath in it no profit but the name.
that have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
at his post; then] bernardo, [who approaches him].
at his heels a stone.
attendants with foils and gauntlets.
bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
be you content to lend your patience to us,
bear hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
bears such an emphasis? Whose phrase of sorrow
bellow for revenge.
bet against the danish. Why is this all impon'd, as you call it?
blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
between the pass and fell incensed points
bonnet to his right use. 'tis for the head.
boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so i
both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
breeding but to play at loggets with 'em? Mine ache to think
brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. He sends to
brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose,
burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
but i am very sorry, good horatio,
but i do prophesy th' election lights
but let it be. Horatio, i am dead;
but age with his stealing steps
but even his mother shall uncharge the practice
but our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
but pardon't, as you are a gentleman.
but since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
but that i know love is begun by time,
but that this folly douts it. Exit.
but to confront the visage of offence?
but to recover of us, by strong hand
but what we do determine oft we break.
by william shakespeare
buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
can serve my turn? 'forgive me my foul murther'?
but yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother
by cock, they are to blame.
carpenter?
can you advise me?
by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then.
chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
choose but weep to think they would lay him i' th' cold ground.
change rapiers, [and hamlet wounds laertes].
clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
[clown digs and] sings.
claudius, king of denmark.
colours, and attendants.
come short of what he did.
comes armed through our watch, so like the king
conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
collected from all simples that have virtue
come, i will give you way for these your letters,
confederate season, else no creature seeing;
conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
contagion to this world. Now could i drink hot blood
but die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
but fill unshaken when they mellow be.
but it reserv'd some quantity of choice
church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not
conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,
could not (with all their quantity of love)
could not so mope.
counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet
cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
devis'd a new commission; wrote it fair.
did hamlet so envenom with his envy
did not together pluck such envy from him
did the first murther! This might be the pate of a politician,
did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
did squeak and gibber in the roman streets;
defence?
cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
did sometimes march? By heaven i charge thee speak!
died. They say he made a good end.
dies in his own too-much. That we would do,
dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
directly seasons him his enemy.
divided from herself and her fair-judgment,
does by their own insinuation grow.
ere you had done.
enter king.
even here between the chaste unsmirched brows
folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
for 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
for food and diet, to some enterprise
for in the fatness of these pursy times
for good polonius' death, and we have done but greenly
eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.
[exit horatio. ]
[exit second clown. ]
full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,
for use almost can change the stamp of nature,
for by the image of my cause i see
for who not needs shall never lack a friend,
give me my father!
give, me superfluous death. A noise within.
good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
grave-making?
grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
ham. I beseech you remember.
ham. I dare not confess that, lest i should compare with him in
ham. I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not
disasters in the sun; and the moist star
discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;
discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
each small annexment, petty consequence,
dramatis personae
ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
enter a lord.
drink off this potion! Is thy union here?
[exeunt all but hamlet. ]
fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
enter a messenger with letters.
excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can i
finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
for and a shrouding sheet;
for art and exercise in your defence,
for goodness, growing to a plurisy,
[drum; trumpets sound; a piece goes off [within].
each opposite that blanks the face of joy
earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he
else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], king,
enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: alexander died,
enter ghost.
enter hamlet.
enter queen.
equivocation will undo us. By the lord, horatio, this three years
even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
[exit attendant. ]
fall ten times treble on that cursed head
[exit lord. ]
favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, horatio,
fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
for england. Of them i have much to tell thee. Farewell.
for he was likely, had he been put on,
for her perfections. But my revenge will come.
for husband shalt thou-
for, though i am not splenitive and rash,
fordo it own life. 'twas of some estate.
from the fair forehead of an innocent love,
free me so far in your most generous thoughts
gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' christian burial.
give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, i'll ha't.
go to thy deathbed;
good gertrude, set some watch over your son. -
grop'd i to find out them; had my desire,
had i but time (as this fell sergeant, death,
[grapples with him].
guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.
grave. ]
had it th' ability of life to thank you.
had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
ham. Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as
ham. Why, i will fight with him upon this theme
ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
hamlet the dane. [leaps in after laertes.
hath clawed me in his clutch,
he may approve our eyes and speak to it.
he should the bearers put to sudden death,
(hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.
his silence will sit drooping.
hyperion's curls; the front of jove himself;
hold up adam's profession.
hor. That is most certain.
hor. You will lose this wager, my lord.
how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
i be so able as now.
i will win for him if i can; if not, i will gain nothing but my
i'll rant as well as thou.
how to forget that learning; but, sir, now
if thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
if you desire to know the certainty
ham. O villany! Ho! Let the door be lock'd.
hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
[hamlet moves him to put on his hat. ]
hath borne me on his back a thousand tunes. And now how abhorred
hath in the skirts of norway, here and there,
have heaven and earth together demonstrated
hath turn'd itself on me. Lo, here i lie,
he answers:
he likewise gives a frock or livery,
he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
he that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;
he never will come again.
'he that thou knowest thine, hamlet. '
he.
[he] sleeps.
her brother is in secret come from france;
her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
here's to thy health.
him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not
high on a stage be placed to the view;
his madness is poor hamlet's enemy.
hor. E'en so, my lord.
i do receive your offer'd love like love,
i do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
i have a voice and precedent of peace
i stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
i hop'd thou shouldst have been my hamlet's wife;
i thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
i'll blessing beg of you. - for this same lord,
if damned custom have not braz'd it so
imagination trace the noble dust of alexander till he find it
if it be made of penetrable stuff;
if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
importing denmark's health, and england's too,
in noise so rude against me?
is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
if, once a widow, ever i be wife!
is thought-sick at the act.
it did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
it could not move thus.
it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be
it means, say you this:
it sends some precious instance of itself
knave jowls it to the ground, as if 'twere cain's jawbone, that
laer. What ceremony else?
laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial
larded all with sweet flowers;
horatio. A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He
how these things came about. So shall you hear
i am afeard you make a wanton of me.
i do not know from what part of the world
i should be greeted, if not from lord hamlet.
i, his sole son, do this same villain send
in denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;
in his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
in ear and ear. O my dear gertrude, this,
in hugger-mugger to inter him; poor ophelia
is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
is the main motive of our preparations,
in further evil?
in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those
is very cunning in.
it not?
know, to divide him inventorially would dozy th' arithmetic of
in which the majesty of buried denmark
'laertes shall be king! Laertes king! '
larded with many several sorts of reasons,
lest with this piteous action you convert
let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
let in the maid, that out a maid
let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil
let the bloat king tempt you again to bed;
letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of
[lifts up the arras and sees polonius. ]
like wonder-wounded hearers? This is i,
lips that i have kiss'd i know not how oft. Where be your gibes
liquor.
make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
make ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
make you to ravel all this matter out,
[makes a pass through the arras and] kills polonius.
man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
master's daughter.
may violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
meet what i would have well, and it destroy,
memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.
might it not?
might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
my head should be struck off.
millions of acres on us, till our ground,
more than their even-christen. Come, my spade! There is no
my stern effects. Then what i have to do
much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
new lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
next, your son gone, and he most violent author
no noble rite nor formal ostentation, -
not shriving time allow'd.
not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this
no trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
now? Your gambols? Your songs? Your flashes of merriment that
no, not to stay the finding of the axe,
of bell and burial.
not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:
o thou vile king,
of blue olympus.
of his own just remove; the people muddied,
infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
in the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
into a tow'ring passion.
into england.
it shall as level to your judgment pierce
laer. It is here, hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain;
[laertes falls. ]
laertes before you fall to play.
lay not that flattering unction to your soul
[laertes wounds hamlet; then] in scuffling, they
let come what comes; only i'll be reveng'd
king. Follow her close; give her good watch, i pray you.
is strict in his arrest) o, i could tell you-
king. How long hath she been thus?
know if your pleasure hold to play with laertes, or that you will
keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of
ladies. Good night, good night. Exit
laer. How now? What noise is that?
like a good child and a true gentleman.
last, and as such containing as all these,
like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'tis
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
[march within. ]
methought it was very sweet;
most throughly for my father.
(my fears forgetting manners) to unseal
much approve me. Well, sir?
my sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.
never departed more.
newly come to court laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
no medicine in the world can do thee good.
nor thine on me! Dies.
(o royal knavery! ), an exact command,
'now the king drinks to hamlet. ' come, begin.
o, methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet.
o'erbears your offices. The rabble call him lord;
o, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
of mighty opposites.
of mercy; but they knew what they did: i am to do a good turn for
of mine own eyes.
of my true mother.
of this post-haste and romage in the land.
of violent birth, but poor validity;
of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge
for some must watch, while some must sleep:
for such a guest is meet.
for such a guest is meet.
for we will fetters put upon this fear,
for your succession in denmark?
for women's fear and love holds quantity,
fortunes turn turk with me-with two provincial roses on my raz'd
ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
further trade with us?
'hamlet. '
here stooping to your clemency,
great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his
had witchcraft in't. He grew unto his seat,
ham. Ay, sir, what of him?
have not the skill.
he swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
his kibe. - how long hast thou been a grave-maker?
his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
his wife, baptista. You shall see anon. 'tis a knavish piece of
i could not but by her. The other motive
honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
i ha't!
i stand in pause where i shall first begin,
i have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe
hath sent me to you.
how in my words somever she be shent,
i will speak daggers to her, but use none.
hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
importing health and graveness. Two months since
it may be death.
no more to undertake it, i will work him
my operant powers their functions leave to do.
i your commission will forthwith dispatch,
here was a gentleman of normandy.
not so wildly from my affair.
of the unworthiest siege.
out of his lunacies.
plunge him into far more choler.
so mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
that i might be the organ.
so you will not o'errule me to a peace.
that live and feed upon your majesty.
that spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
that we are made of stuff so flat and dull
that we can let our beard be shook with danger,
the light and careless livery that it wears
the graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
if one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
if he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
if this did blast in proof. Soft! Let me see.
is the great love the general gender bear him,
if you oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his
in neither aught, or in extremity.
into a toil?
it hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
laer. What out of this, my lord?
lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,
is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
king. If it be so, laertes
lives almost by his looks; and for myself, -
laer. Why ask you this?
make us again count o'er ere love be done!
may fit us to our shape. If this should fall,
more than in words?
more, ha?
most generous, and free from all contriving,
musty.
my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you
my virtue or my plague, be it either which, -
neptune's salt wash and tellus' orbed ground,
o, a pit of clay for to be made
of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will
pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of
of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in's time a
or with a little shuffling, you may choose
pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
requite him for your father.
revenge should have no bounds. But, good laertes,
say-
ros. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
scarcely lie in this box; and must th' inheritor himself have no
should have a back or second, that might hold
shall be the end of my business.
since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
so far from cheer and from your former state.
speak. 'sblood, do you think i am easier to be play'd on than a
that he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
that he could nothing do but wish and beg
that i shall live and tell him to his teeth,
stood challenger on mount of all the age
that i, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
that hurts by easing. But to the quick o' th' ulcer!
the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps
the rather, if you could devise it so
the frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together
the lives of many. The cesse of majesty
the soul of nero enter this firm bosom.
the speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
thin settled age his sables and his weeds,
this is but scratch'd withal. I'll touch my point
image of a murther done in vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name;
it is our trick; nature her custom holds,
kingdom. To-morrow shall i beg leave to see your kingly eyes;
my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
my fault is past. But, o, what form of prayer
occasion of my sudden and more strange return.
now fear i this will give it start again;
of him that brought them.
of those effects for which i did the murther-
of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls
of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
on wholesome life usurp immediately.
of jove himself; and now reigns here
on't.
or like a creature native and indued
or pardon'd being down? Then i'll look up;
our purpose may hold there. - but stay, what noise,
pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
pound! Didst perceive?
souls, it touches us not. Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers
'thus didest thou. '
pursued my life.
seeks her own salvation?
the bell then beating one-
this to your majesty; this to the queen.
the woman will be out. Adieu, my lord.
thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
though inclination be as sharp as will.
'tis now the very witching time of night,
'tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
[reads]'high and mighty, -you shall know i am set naked on your
shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of gonzago's wife.
shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
that was and is the question of these wars.
so fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, laertes.
that liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
the puppets dallying.
therefore let's follow.
this realm dismantled was
that shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
the hart ungalled play;
thus runs the world away.
thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
thy natural magic and dire property
till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
to exploit now ripe in my device,
to give them seals never, my soul, consent! Exit.
to hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
to keep those many many bodies safe
to keep itself from noyance; but much more
to let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
to muddy death.
last king hamlet overcame fortinbras.
on fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
on plots and errors happen.
on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-
oph. Pray you mark.
or but a sickly part of one true sense
or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
osr. Of laertes?
or quit in answer of the third exchange,
or i could make a prologue to my brains,
or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;
osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
osr. Sir?
or you deny me right. Go but apart,
or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
own grinning? Quite chap- fall'n? Now get you to my lady's
our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
other. Go to!
[polonius hides behind the arras. ]
our indiscretion sometime serves us well
pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, i
[puts down the skull. ]
queen, laertes, with lords attendant. ]
remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.
repast them with my blood.
queen. O, confound the rest!
[retires with horatio. ]
sport and repose lock from me day and night,
to desperation turn my trust and hope,
that are so fortified against our story,
should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was yorick's
the point: if i drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an
the tedious day with sleep.
to show yourself your father's son in deed
to wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
top of my bent. - i will come by-and-by.
our wills and fates do so contrary run
over the nasty sty!
popp'd in between th' election and my hopes;
pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
prais'd my lord such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might
purpose, confess thyself-
put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
reynaldo, servant to polonius.
question next, say 'a grave-maker. ' the houses he makes lasts
save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
rough-hew them how we will-
shipwright, or the carpenter?
that our devices still are overthrown;
that, if again this apparition come,
tenants.
touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
under the moon, can save the thing from death
under the which he shall not choose but fall;
the poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;
thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the
weigh what convenience both of time and means
unto our climature and countrymen.
were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
what we two nights have seen.
what's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
when churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
when second husband kisses me in bed.
where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
rawer breath
repair hither and say you are not fit.
roughly awake, i here proclaim was madness.
richer than that which four successive kings
sense.
repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
that even our loves should with our fortunes change;
the passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
their own enactures with themselves destroy.
[throws up a skull. ]
till doomsday. Go, get thee to yaughan; fetch me a stoup of
to contract- o- the time for- a- my behove,
to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
to pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
'twere better not assay'd. Therefore this project
we should do when we would; for this 'would' changes,
upon whose influence neptune's empire stands
unto that element; but long it could not be
what should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
when down her weedy trophies and herself
when i shall (first asking your pardon thereunto) recount the
where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
where now it burns, marcellus and myself,
wherein they say you shine, your sun of parts
which now goes too free-footed.
was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
when yond same star that's westward from the pole
whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
which this ass now o'erreaches; one that would circumvent god,
which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,
which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
scene vi.
[scatters flowers. ]
shame and the odd hits.
shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
she turns to favour and to prettiness.
she should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd
she's so conjunctive to my life and soul
should be as mortal as an old man's life?
should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
since love our hearts, and hymen did our hands,
show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
since frost itself as actively doth burn,
singeing his pate against the burning zone,
(sings) to-morrow is saint valentine's day,
(sings) white his shroud as the mountain snow-
[sings] for bonny sweet robin is all my joy.
[sings] by gis and by saint charity,
[sings] o, a pit of clay for to be made
speak to me.
so bloodily hast struck.
speak loudly for him.
sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
t' o'ertop old pelion or the skyish head
take longer time.
th' important acting of your dread command?
th' effect of what i wrote?
sir, - it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for england- if
sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
skull, the king's jester.
slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple i
start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that
than young laertes, in a riotous head,
stopping a bunghole?
subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
that are but mutes or audience to this act,
that blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
that both the world, i give to negligence,
that has no relish of salvation in't-
that i essentially am not in madness,
that hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
that from a shelf the precious diadem stole
that i must be their scourge and minister.
that i must call't in question.
that may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
so crimeful and so capital in nature,
so by his father lost; and this, i take it,
'so would i 'a' done, by yonder sun,
spent.
stick fiery off indeed.
tell me one thing.
that aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
that he which hath your noble father slain
that i have shot my arrow o'er the house
that inward breaks, and shows no cause without
that might your nature, honour, and exception
that not your trespass but my madness speaks.
that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
that patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
that rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead.
that rots itself in ease on lethe wharf,
that she should lock herself from his resort,
that shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
that suck'd the honey of his music vows,
that show of such an exercise may colour
that so his sickness, age, and impotence
that swift as quicksilverr it courses through
that they do know my son, come you more nearer
that they may seem the taints of liberty,
that thou so many princes at a shot
that thus he suffers for.
that thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
that thy rebellion looks so giantlike?
that to the use of actions fair and good
that treason can but peep to what it would,
that unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
that we find out the cause of this effect-
that we with wisest sorrow think on him
that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren
that you do bend your eye on vacancy,
that you know aught of me- this is not to do,
that you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
that you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
that youth and observation copied there,
that's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile
that, being of so young clays brought up with him,
that, on the view and knowing of these contents,
that, open'd, lies within our remedy.
the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
the bird of dawning singeth all night long;
the cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
the cock crows.
the changeling never known. Now, the next day
the cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
that your good beauties be the happy cause
that, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
that, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
that, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
that, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
the bold winds speechless, and the orb below
the corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
the death i gave him. So again, good night.
the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
the devil himself.
the first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look
the glass of fashion and the mould of form,
the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
the hand more instrumental to the mouth,
the only men.
the head and source of all your son's distemper.
the hearers to collection; they aim at it,
the insolence of office, and the spurns
[the king puts laertes' hand into hamlet's. ]
the need we have to use you did provoke
the nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
the king shall drink to hamlet's better breath,
the king.
the natural gates and alleys of the body,
the ocean, overpeering of his list,
the lists, and full proportions are all made
the origin and commencement of his grief
the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves,
the soldiers' music and the rites of war
the queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
the source of this our watch, and the chief head
the thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;
the guts of a beggar.
the form of plausive manners, that these men
the heartache, and the thousand natural shocks
the imminent death of twenty thousand men
the pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
the rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
'the rugged pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
'the rugged pyrrhus, like th' hyrcanian beast-'
the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
the instant burst of clamour that she made
the memory be green, and that it us befitted
the leperous distilment; whose effect
the players ready.
the stair, into the lobby.
the present death of hamlet. Do it, england;
their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,
these but the trappings and the suits of woe.
then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
they had begun the play. I sat me down;
they find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
that i have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
that no revenue hast but thy good spirits
that roars so loud and thunders in the index?
that swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe,
that they are not a pipe for fortune's finger
that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
[the attendants part them, and they come out of the
that to laertes i forgot myself,
that you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
the apparition comes. I knew your father.
the cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
the counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
the inward service of the mind and soul
the perfume and suppliance of a minute;
the portraiture of his. I'll court his favours.
the ratifiers and props of every word,
the safety and health of this whole state,
the serpent that did sting thy father's life
the very soul, and sweet religion makes
the virtue of his will; but you must fear,
the will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
there is a play to-night before the king.
they bore him barefac'd on the bier
this marvel to you.
they cry 'choose we! Laertes shall be king! '
this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
thou canst not then be false to any man.
till i have caught her once more in mine arms.
though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
till of this flat a mountain you have made
to give the world assurance of a man.
till our scale turn the beam. O rose of may!
[to laertes] strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.
'tis told me he hath very oft of late
to let this canker of our nature come
to let you know of it.
to make it truster of your own report
to his unmast'red importunity.
to serve in such a difference. What devil was't
to sound what stop she please. Give me that man
tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,
'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature,
unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
until my eyelids will no longer wag.
unto the voice and yielding of that body
upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
upon the witness of these gentlemen,
visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
that would not let me sleep. Methought i lay
the better to beguile. This is for all:
the kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
the triumph of his pledge.
that, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
the pith and marrow of our attribute.
their grand commission; where i found, horatio
there's a divinity that shapes our ends,
they clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase
they shall go far with little.
this grave shall have a living monument.
'this must be so. ' we pray you throw to earth
thou com'st in such a questionable shape
this unprevailing woe, and think of us
thou know'st already.
thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
thrown out his angle for my proper life,
thy knotted and combined locks to part,
till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,
'tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
till then in patience our proceeding be.
'tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
'tis heavy with him; and am i then reveng'd,
to business with the king, more than the scope
'tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
to cast thee up again. What may this mean
to do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
to ears of flesh and blood. List, list, o, list!
to feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?
to give it due content.
to flaming youth let virtue be as wax
to give these mourning duties to your father;
to reason most absurd, whose common theme
to hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil
to heaven.
to mine own room again; making so bold
to quit him with this arm? And is't not to be damn'd
to show my duty in your coronation,
to sing a requiem and such rest to her
to take him in the purging of his soul,
to tell the secrets of my prison house,
to those of mine!
vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile. Let a beast be
upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
waterfly?
when our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us
when the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
when the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
to you in satisfaction; but if not,
together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
what is the issue of the business there.
when that her golden couplets are disclos'd,
upon his will i seal'd my hard consent.
where every god did seem to set his seal
when thou liest howling.
where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
where you may see the inmost part of you.
to what i shall unfold.
to you alone.
was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
what i have said to you.
when he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
when i to sulph'rous and tormenting flames
where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
which i have told thee, of my father's death.
which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!
which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
which was the model of that danish seal;
whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a
the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
the tragedy of hamlet, prince of denmark
the trumpet to the cannoneer without,
the undiscover'd country, from whose bourn
the unseen good old man.
the very cause of hamlet's lunacy.
the youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
them to their trial-the bubbles are out,
thee where i am. Rosencrantz and guildenstern hold their course
them. Let the king have the letters i have sent, and repair thou
then goes he to the length of all his arm,
then hamlet does it not, hamlet denies it.
there falling out at tennis'; or perchance,
there was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
they are. To a nunnery, go. Exit.
they bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
[they swear. ]
thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
think how ill all's here about my heart. But it is no matter.
thirty years.
this mad young man. But so much was our love
this present object made probation.
this something-settled matter in his heart,
this, give these fellows some means to the king. They have
till by some elder masters of known honour
to be your valentine.
this spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow
'tis strange.
to be contracted in one brow of woe,
thus set it down: he shall with speed to england
thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
to be commanded.
to bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
to cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
to draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
to england send him; or confine him where
to give in evidence. What then? What rests?
to him from whom you brought them. Exeunt.
to keep it from divulging, let it feed
to keep my name ungor'd. But till that time
to lay our service freely at your feet,
to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words
to our most valiant brother. So much for him.
to norway, uncle of young fortinbras,
to show his grief. Let her be round with him;
to punish me with this, and this with me,
to speak of horrors- he comes before me.
to put an antic disposition on),
to tell us this.
to the inheritance of fortinbras,
to the next abstinence; the next more easy;
to try conclusions, in the basket creep
to lack discretion. Come, go we to the king.
to my revenge. But in my terms of honour
to make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
to prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
to show us so much gentry and good will
to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
to you yourself, to us, to every one.
to whom he more adheres. If it will please you
to youth and liberty.
trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our
together with remembrance of ourselves.
true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else
ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle;
unhous'led, disappointed, unanel'd,
tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
unmix'd with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
unpeg the basket on the house's top,
unto him. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her
unto young hamlet; for, upon my life,
very liberal conceit.
very day that young hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent
very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too
videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
wantonness your ignorance. Go to, i'll no more on't! It hath made
was gaged by our king; which had return'd
we must with all our majesty and skill
whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
we would not understand what was most fit,
were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your
what company, at what expense; and finding
what is't to leave betimes? Let be.
what part a gentleman would see.
what thou hast said to me.
when sorrows come, they come not single spies.
when he th' ambitious norway combated.
where we shall find him most conveniently. Exeunt.
wherein our saviour's birth is celebrated,
whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
whips out his rapier, cries 'a rat, a rat! '
who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
whom i will trust as i will adders fang'd,
whose motive in this case should stir me most
whose blood and judgment are so well commingled
was not like madness. There's something in his soul
what forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
which bewept to the grave did not go
when in one line two crafts directly meet.
who was in life a foolish peating knave.
whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
whose violent property fordoes itself
whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
why should we in our peevish opposition
why seems it so particular with thee?
will be some danger; which for to prevent,
will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last
will sate itself in a celestial bed
with an attent ear, till i may deliver
why thou art thus incens'd. Let him go, gertrude.
why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
will nothing stick our person to arraign
will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.
winner and loser?
with almost all the holy vows of heaven.
with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may;
with an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
with all my imperfections on my head.
with all my love i do commend me to you;
with arms encumb'red thus, or this head-shake,
with mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
with juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
with pestilent speeches of his father's death,
with sore distraction. What i have done
with such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
with this affair along. For all, our thanks.
the which he loved passing well. '
the very faculties of eyes and ears.
them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as i
them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties
thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
they?
there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,
thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
there's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;
they have proclaim'd their malefactions;
this bodes some strange eruption to our state.
this night to play before him.
this, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
thou liv'st; report me and my cause aright
those that would make mows at him while my father lived give
'tis not so; it begins with pyrrhus:
to all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
to be forestalled ere we come to fall,
to any pastime?
there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you
they'll tell all.
(things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me!
'thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
this sudden sending him away must seem
this warlike volley.
'tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage
through your dominions for this enterprise,
to be a preparation 'gainst the polack,
to fust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be
to grunt and sweat under a weary life,
to both your honours.
to give th' assay of arms against your majesty.
to hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
to do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me.
to tell my story. [march afar off, and shot within. ]
to his confine; and of the truth herein
to hear and see the matter.
to have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
to hear him so inclin'd.
to make oppression bitter, or ere this
to hear of it. They are here about the court,
to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a
to offer it the show of violence;
to tell him his commandment is fulfill'd
together with that fair and warlike form
to the ambassadors of england gives
tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene
twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in
unbated and envenom'd. The foul practice
uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring. - masters, you are
(unless things mortal move them not at all)
was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
valanc'd since i saw thee last. Com'st' thou to' beard me in
was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway,
'to the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
to the unsatisfied.
to their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox,
tragedians of the city.
transports his poisoned shot- may miss our name
truly deliver.
upon a fearful summons. I have heard
unite comutual in most sacred bands.
upon whose property and most dear life
visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.
we cannot get from him.
we beg your hearing patiently. [exit. ]
we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar
we go to gain a little patch of ground
we may of their encounter frankly judge
we shall express our duty in his eye;
we o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
we will bestow ourselves. - [to ophelia] read on this book,
well ratified by law and heraldry,
well. - welcome, good friends. - o, my old friend? Why, thy face is
went to cuffs in the question.
what feast is toward in thine eternal cell
what is't but to be nothing else but mad?
what majesty should be, what duty is,
what, is horatio there ?
when it prov'd otherwise. ?
when i had seen this hot love on the wing
where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
which happily foreknowing may avoid,
which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
who in her duty and obedience, mark,
why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
why you proceeded not against these feats
will you walk out of the air, my lord?
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between
willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
within the centre.
what warlike noise is this?
when he lay couched in the ominous horse,
when he himself might his quietus make
when honour's at the stake. How stand i then,
when she saw pyrrhus make malicious sport
when we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
when we would bring him on to some confession
where my abridgment comes.
while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
which may to you, perhaps, seein much unsinew'd,
with an entreaty, herein further shown,
will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?
with this regard their currents turn awry
without more motive, into every brain
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which i
yet the unshaped use of it doth move
you know the wager?
you mainly were stirr'd up.
you say right, sir; a monday morning; twas so indeed.
you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free
whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
wherein i'll catch the conscience of the king. Exit.
whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
which is not tomb enough and continent
which have solicited- the rest is silence. Dies.
which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.
which we do tender as we dearly grieve
which was declining on the milky head
who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
whose image even but now appear'd to us,
whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,
why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
why the man dies. - i humbly thank you, sir.
why this same strict and most observant watch
why to a public count i might not go
why yet i live to say 'this thing's to do, '
will he nill he, he goes- mark you that. But if the water come to
will not debate the question of this straw.
whose worth, if praises may go back again,
why does the drum come hither?
will bring him to his wonted way again,
will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
will you be rul'd by me?
with blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
with heraldry more dismal. Head to foot
will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
with a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,
with all the strength and armour of the mind
with bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
with eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhus
with less remorse than pyrrhus' bleeding sword
with martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
with fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
with forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
with hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
with this contagion, that, if i gall him slightly,
with most miraculous organ, i'll have these players
with this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain!
with the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thought
with true-love showers.
with witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts-
with wondrous potency. Once more, good night;
with thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
with turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
with tristful visage, as against the doom,
with us to watch the minutes of this night,
with variable objects, shall expel
with which she followed my poor father's body
with windlasses and with assays of bias,
with, hoo! Such bugs and goblins in my life-
within 's two hours.
within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd
within the book and volume of my brain,
without debatement further, more or less,
without the sensible and true avouch
without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
work; but what o' that? Your majesty, and we that have free
would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.
would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would
would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;
would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father
yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
yea, this solidity and compound mass,
yes, faith, heartily.
yet now i must confess, that duty done,
yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
you are the most immediate to our throne,
you cannot play upon me.
you from the polack wars, and you from england,
worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly-
world.
would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib
would have reverted to my bow again,
would quake to look on. Soft! Now to my mother!
would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
yet needfull too; for youth no less becomes
yet have i in me something dangerous,
you cannot call it love; for at your age
you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
you i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.
you must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
you promis'd me to wed. '
you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand,
would make them capable. - do not look upon me,
would perhaps trouble a woman.
you do not understand yourself so clearly
would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
you must not take for fire. From this time
your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
your bounty. Take them in.
your leave and favour to return to france;
yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, hamlet, hear.
you go not till i set you up a glass
you nine year.
you heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
you, as your business and desires shall point you,
your friend.
your loneliness. - we are oft to blame in this,
your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:
your mother's commandment; if not, your pardon and my return
your name be horatio, as i am let to know it is.
your party in converse, him you would sound,
your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
your sudden coming o'er to play with you.
your table!
your visitation shall receive such thanks
your whoreson dead body. Here's a skull now. This skull hath lien
your wisdom best shall think.
yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath


    ------------------Text sorted by endings-------------------    


reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
Ham. They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I
Guil. But these cannot i command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy. I
1604
of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in's time a
chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a
Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for i'll have a
Ham. O god, i could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a
purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a
speak. 'sblood, do you think i am easier to be play'd on than a
Other. Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a
obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a
Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
Ham. In the secret parts of fortune? O! Most true! She is a
Ham. [aside to horatio] thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a
anything we see. We'll have a speech straight. Come, give us a
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a
to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a
Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a
that beetles o'er his base into the sea,
hecuba.
What's hecuba to him, or he to hecuba,
For hecuba!
more, ha?
that looks so many fadoms to the sea
as deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?
ophelia, '-
Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor ophelia,
in hugger-mugger to inter him; poor ophelia
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet ophelia!
and fall a-cursing like a very drab,
Pol. And let him ply his music.
lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,
Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, osric.
and therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd
let come what comes; only i'll be reveng'd
whom i will trust as i will adders fang'd,
than may be given you. In few, ophelia,
sprung from neglected love. - how now, ophelia?
Queen. How now, ophelia?
Enter laertes and ophelia.
Enter ophelia.
Enter ophelia.
affront ophelia.
Ham. What, the fair ophelia?
Queen. Nay, but ophelia-
King. Pretty ophelia!
'in her excellent white bosom, these, &c. '
Come, some music!
would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib
(for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub!
or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
lord hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,
'gainst fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.
whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,
she should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd
'tis heavy with him; and am i then reveng'd,
hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd
repugnant to command. Unequal match'd,
of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd;
Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch'd
so lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
no hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd
to quit him with this arm? And is't not to be damn'd
wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
that, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd
his nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
Guil. Is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.
to feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?
and where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd,
now is be total gules, horridly trick'd
ham. O villany! Ho! Let the door be lock'd.
Oph. 'tis in my memory lock'd,
Hor. (reads the letter) 'horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd
Hor. How was this seal'd?
Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
in his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
Laer. My lord, i will be rul'd;
an understanding simple and unschool'd;
and carriage of the article design'd,
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
that have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
Ham. Why, e'en so! And now my lady worm's, chapless, and knock'd
unhous'led, disappointed, unanel'd,
to tell him his commandment is fulfill'd
and so am i reveng'd. That would be scann'd.
never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.
Capt. Yes, it is already garrison'd.
nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
But let this same be presently perform'd,
Hor. You might have rhym'd.
to hear him so inclin'd.
and with his head over his shoulder turn'd
was gaged by our king; which had return'd
are joyfully return'd.
Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?
wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
that i, the son of a dear father murther'd,
a sable silver'd.
King. To thine own peace. If he be now return'd
Queen. Drown'd, drown'd.
who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd
or if it was, not above once; for the play, i remember, pleas'd
the youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,
King. Part them! They are incens'd.
when that her golden couplets are disclos'd,
That cannot be; since i am still possess'd
My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
But virtue, as it never will be mov'd,
that rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead.
fortunes turn turk with me-with two provincial roses on my raz'd
Laer. He is justly serv'd.
which may to you, perhaps, seein much unsinew'd,
not shriving time allow'd.
King. Dead.
Ham. Safely stow'd.
Ham. [draws] how now? A rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
the graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
Clown. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.
A second time i kill my husband dead
t' o'ertop old pelion or the skyish head
Ber. In the same figure, like the king that's dead.
than young laertes, in a riotous head,
with all my imperfections on my head.
with bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
but let it be. Horatio, i am dead;
but die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
No, no, he is dead;
But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
bonnet to his right use. 'tis for the head.
fall ten times treble on that cursed head
the source of this our watch, and the chief head
which was declining on the milky head
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
Queen. Alas, he's mad!
what is't but to be nothing else but mad?
in the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
will sate itself in a celestial bed
let the bloat king tempt you again to bed;
when second husband kisses me in bed.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;
Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
an thou hadst not come to my bed. '
go to thy deathbed;
If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
to be commanded.
Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Mar. It is offended.
Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
But wilt thou bear me how i did proceed?
and you must needs have heard, how i am punish'd
as had he been incorps'd and demi-natur'd
as false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed
by desperate appliance are reliev'd,
but we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
to show yourself your father's son in deed
King. O heavy deed!
stick fiery off indeed.
Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed
where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
a combination and a form indeed
you say right, sir; a monday morning; twas so indeed.
And i, of ladies most deject and wretched,
For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
to the unsatisfied.
Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
that he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
to keep it from divulging, let it feed
'to the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
whose blood and judgment are so well commingled
wherein our saviour's birth is celebrated,
when he th' ambitious norway combated.
with hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Laer. A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.
by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
and, as you said, and wisely was it said,
come short of what he did.
King. She sounds to see them bleed.
enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: alexander died,
of his own just remove; the people muddied,
those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
which happily foreknowing may avoid,
Her mood will needs be pitied.
world.
would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would
that treason can but peep to what it would,
only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and
King. 'tis hamlet's character. 'naked! '
hath borne me on his back a thousand tunes. And now how abhorred
that, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
have heaven and earth together demonstrated
Enter ophelia distracted.
thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
which now goes too free-footed.
the memory be green, and that it us befitted
or like a creature native and indued
So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
Laer. My will, not all the world!
them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
you promis'd me to wed. '
full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
and both neglect. What if this cursed hand
but to recover of us, by strong hand
so nightly toils the subject of the land,
Hor. Do, if it will not stand.
one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for england!
died. They say he made a good end.
for england.
an eye like mars, to threaten and command;
I dare damnation. To this point i stand,
end.
conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
as make your bouts more violent to that end-
i thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
let in the maid, that out a maid
to what i shall unfold.
to mine own room again; making so bold
should have a back or second, that might hold
rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
i do not know from what part of the world
and let me speak to the yet unknowing world
Laer. Know you the hand?
In the corrupted currents of this world
the corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and
If by direct or by collateral hand
Capt. Against some part of poland.
for who not needs shall never lack a friend,
Laer. Do you see this, o god?
great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
and you must put me in your heart for friend,
your friend.
King. Love? His affections do not that way tend;
I must be cruel, only to be kind;
Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
choose but weep to think they would lay him i' th' cold ground.
My brother shall know of it; and so i thank you for your good
contagion to this world. Now could i drink hot blood
and for his death no wind
Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
excitements of my reason and my blood,
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard
and, like a man to double business bound,
your party in converse, him you would sound,
as stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
as did that one; and that, in my regard,
enter a lord.
Laer. That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;
which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
and hath shipped me intil the land,
I cannot live to hear the news from england,
you from the polack wars, and you from england,
of this post-haste and romage in the land.
thus set it down: he shall with speed to england
into england.
the present death of hamlet. Do it, england;
you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand,
The end
Osr. Young fortinbras, with conquest come from poland,
Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand
i, his sole son, do this same villain send
and hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
Osr. Ay, my good lord.
Elsinore. A churchyard.
i'll blessing beg of you. - for this same lord,
[exit lord. ]
Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!
Oph. At home, my lord.
(o royal knavery! ), an exact command,
th' important acting of your dread command?
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
Laer. Upon my life, lamound.
we go to gain a little patch of ground
millions of acres on us, till our ground,
which this ass now o'erreaches; one that would circumvent god,
that to the use of actions fair and good
with all the strength and armour of the mind
neptune's salt wash and tellus' orbed ground,
King. Full thirty times hath phoebus' cart gone round
Hor. Friends to this ground.
no medicine in the world can do thee good.
yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.
were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
repast them with my blood.
Ham. [aside] wormwood, wormwood!
upon a fearful summons. I have heard
Fie upon't! Foh! About, my brain! Hum, i have heard
'tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Ber. Have you had quiet guard?
Guil. My honour'd lord!
o'erbears your offices. The rabble call him lord;
Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.
Oph. 'tis brief, my lord.
Mess. Save yourself, my lord:
guil. A thing, my lord?
Hor. Very well, my lord.
What does this mean, my lord?
Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
Hor. Nay, good my lord -
and with them words of so sweet breath compos'd
and gather by him, as he is behav'd,
it was against your highness; whereat griev'd,
city? Are they so follow'd?
and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.
Or that the everlasting had not fix'd
Ham. No, by this bad.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead
Ham. How came he mad?
We should profane the service of the dead
Pol. That hath made him mad.
i will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
and then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
and at our more consider'd time we'll read,
Pol. This business is well ended.
Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
Queen. So he does indeed.
Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
i did repel his letters and denied
is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
be all my sins rememb'red.
Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;
Oph. O my lord, my lord, i have been so affrighted!
Oph. I was the more deceived.
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,
You need not tell us what lord hamlet said.
But if't be he i mean, he's very wild
Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could
Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which i would set down and
Ham. Pale or red?
Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said
in dreadful secrecy impart they did,
man is twice a child.
as 'well, well, we know, ' or 'we could, an if we would, '
Ham. It is not very strange; for my uncle is king of denmark, and
Thus was i, sleeping, by a brother's hand
Oph. No, my good lord; but, as you did command,
pick'd out of ten thousand.
Ham. O good horatio, i'll take the ghost's word for a thousand
and each particular hair to stand an end
no more; and by a sleep to say we end
mind.
Perpend.
take these again; for to the noble mind
Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
Fran. For this relief much thanks. 'tis bitter cold,
Ham. Why, anything- but to th' purpose. You were sent for; and
Ham. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
Pol. The time invites you. Go, your servants tend.
Ham. [aside] nay then, i have an eye of you. - if you love me, hold
have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and
Hor. It must be shortly known to him from england
Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for england!
If circumstances lead me, i will find
for loan oft loses both itself and friend,
put your dread pleasures more into command
ham. [aside] a little more than kin, and less than kind!
lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
that father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
as it hath us'd to do- that i have found
he tells me, my dear gertrude, he hath found
but better look'd into, he truly found
are burnt and purg'd away. But that i am forbid
Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,
Hor. My lord, i did;
a little month, or ere those shoes were old
seem to me all the uses of this world!
Rey. At 'closes in the consequence, ' at 'friend or so, ' and
Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into england?
Ham. For england?
rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
Ham. Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
he rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound
it waves you to a more removed ground.
Ham. Upon what ground?
Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
Ham. Good.
his canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O god! God!
ham. O god!
form of the thing, each word made true and good,
Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good
Pol. Fore god, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
Pol. That's good! 'mobled queen' is good.
a savageness in unreclaimed blood,
hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;
o'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
So, as a painted tyrant, pyrrhus stood,
Never to speak of this that you have heard:
guildenstern, and other lords attendant, with the guard
our hasty sending. Something have you heard
Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
should be old as i am if, like a crab, you could go backward.
Hor. O, my dear lord!
a damn'd defeat was made. Am i a coward?
Laer. My dread lord,
Mar. My good lord!
Hor. [aside to hamlet] no, my good lord.
1. Play. What speech, my good lord?
Ros. To what end, my lord?
Guil. In what, my dear lord?
Ros. We shall, my lord.
Pol. That's very true, my lord.
Mar. How is't, my noble lord?
Ros. My most dear lord!
Pol. What treasure had he, my lord?
Pol. Do you know me, my lord?
Oph. I think nothing, my lord.
Rey. As gaming, my lord.
Pol. Not i, my lord.
Ham. Very well, my lord.
Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.
Pol. What follows then, my lord?
Rey. I will, my lord.
Rey. But, my good lord-
Pol. Th' ambassadors from norway, my good lord,
Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say 'good morrow, sweet lord!
Oph. My lord?
Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
There, my lord.
Pol. I have, my lord.
Rey. I shall, my lord.
Pol. Fare you well, my lord.
Rey. Well, my lord.
Ros. We think not so, my lord.
Ros. Neither, my lord.
Pol. What is the matter, my lord?
Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.
Oph. What is, my lord?
Guil. What, my lord?
Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
Hor. What's that, my lord?
Hor. Remember it, my lord!
Pol. Honest, my lord?
Pol. I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
Oph. Ay, my lord.
Oph. Ay, my lord.
1. Play. Ay, my lord.
Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.
Swear by my sword.
1. Play. Ay, my lord.
Ham. O, but she'll keep her word.
Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
Let not the royal bed of denmark be
But this eternal blazon must not be
Fran. Bernardo hath my place.
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
as fits a king's remembrance.
King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
Ham. No, nor mine now. [to polonius] my lord, you play'd once
Guil. We will ourselves provide.
and you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
that makes calamity of so long life.
t' have seen what i have seen, see what i see!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
Rey. Ay, my lord,
Oph. You are merry, my lord.
Ros. Good my lord!
Hor. Ay, good my lord.
Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,
and lay your hands again upon my sword.
Queen. If it be,
a minist'ring angel shall my sister be
as he in his particular act and place
Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.
So, by my former lecture and advice,
Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
You are welcome, masters; welcome, all. - i am glad to see thee
Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.
Pol. Have i, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
Pol. What said he?
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
O, vengeance!
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Ham. I'll be your foil, laertes. In mine ignorance
You do remember all the circumstance?
Ham. How long is that since?
Ham. I am tame, sir; pronounce.
a ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
and recks not his own rede.
Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, if i could see
and prey on garbage.
Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
Ham. He did comply with his dug before he suck'd it. Thus has he,
action how like an angel! In apprehension how like a god! The
Ham. Then will i come to my mother by-and-by. - they fool me to the
Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,
Ham. 'the mousetrap. ' marry, how? Tropically. This play is the
Queen. It may be, very like.
Ham. Or like a whale.
Hor. Is't possible?
These hands are not more like.
and he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
be thy intents wicked or charitable,
Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! Most horrible!
My uncle?
Woo't drink up esill? Eat a crocodile?
Ham. They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
as to expend your time with us awhile
Ham. I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.
read, my lord?
Both. Arm'd, my lord.
rey. Very good, my lord.
Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
Hor. (within) my lord, my lord!
Hor. There's no offence, my lord.
Hor. O, where, my lord?
Laer. Most humbly do i take my leave, my lord.
Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.
Mar. Nor i, my lord.
Hor. Well, my lord.
Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.
oph. No, my lord.
Guil. Prison, my lord?
Mar. You shall not go, my lord.
Both [mar. And ber. ] we do, my lord.
Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.
Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
Hor. What news, my lord?
Oph. I shall obey, my lord.
striking too short at greeks. His antique sword,
than is my deed to my most painted word.
Hor. Do not, my lord!
Guil. What should we say, my lord?
Oph. Good my lord,
but with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
takes prisoner pyrrhus' ear. For lo! His sword,
so, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
Ghost. [beneath] swear by his sword.
i could a tale unfold whose lightest word
Ham. Upon my sword.
swear by my sword.
for i mine eyes will rivet to his face,
'swounds, i should take it! For it cannot be
as they fell out by time, by means, and place,
resembles that it was. What it should be,
but even then the morning cock crew loud,
Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
Ham. Then saw you not his face?
Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.
he falls to such perusal of my face
more honour'd in the breach than the observance.
my thoughts and wishes bend again toward france
Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
One scene of it comes near the circumstance,
on such regards of safety and allowance
on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance
nor shall you do my ear that violence
be something scanter of your maiden presence.
but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
pyrrhus at priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
he closes with you in this consequence:
I do not set my life at a pin's fee;
gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee
for what advancement may i hope from thee,
make mad the guilty and appal the free,
bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
in this distracted globe. Remember thee?
but bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Go on. I'll follow thee.
i say, away! - go on. I'll follow thee.
life,
Hor. It was, as i have seen it in his life,
his father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
he hath not fail'd to pester us with message
Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Ghost cries under the stage.
hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
Ham. 'tis very strange.
may sweep to my revenge.
colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
carried away. The poisoner wooes the queen with gifts; she
seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the
King. But how hath she
like niobe, all tears- why she, even she
Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the
temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
him and my daughter. - my honourable lord, i will most humbly take
of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
Elsinore. Hall in the castle.
Elsinore. The platform before the castle.
kill'd me.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.
Ghost. Mark me.
and to the last bended their light on me.
tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like
ladyship is nearer to heaven than when i saw you last by the
Hor. Nay, very pale.
nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,
of his affection to me.
Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.
Ham. Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true. Let me
blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
Come.
But come!
Ghost. My hour is almost come,
king, father, royal dane. O, answer me?
Ham. Why did you laugh then, when i said 'man delights not me'?
Queen. Come hither, my dear hamlet, sit by me.
Queen. O my son, what theme?
Hor. Have after. To what issue wail this come?
Ham. But soft! What noise? Who calls on hamlet? O, here they come.
rome-
Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned dane,
Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
receives rebuke from norway, and, in fine,
i made to her in marriage, and to decline
mine.
For my part, i do not lie in't, yet it is mine.
Ros. Then is the world one.
and a man's life is no more than to say 'one. '
Priest. No more be done.
Laer. Must there no more be done?
now i am alone.
'i saw him enter such a house of sale, '
for it is as the air, invulnerable,
King. As of a man faithful and honourable.
Ham. Is't possible?
black as his purpose, did the night resemble
i had not quoted him. I fear'd he did but trifle
Hor. Season your admiration for a while
in equal scale weighing delight and dole,
Pol. What do you think of me?
speak to me.
stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
his access to me.
it is 'adieu, adieu! Remember me. '
Ham. She well instructs me.
By heaven, i'll make a ghost of him that lets me! -
Pol. Yet here, laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
so hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
Ham. In happy time.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern, [with some
Ham. One.
You cannot speak of reason to the dane
have by the very cunning of the scene
King. Take thy fair hour, laertes. Time be thine,
I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?
and i do think- or else this brain of mine
I have a daughter (have while she is mine),
Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,
like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
For nature crescent does not grow alone
on mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
Ham. From top to toe?
Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?
Laer. O, treble woe
For me, with sorrow i embrace my fortune.
armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
for the supply and profit of our hope,
be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
i'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
Hor. [aside] his purse is empty already. All's golden words are
freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are
me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are
Hor. Half a share.
of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware
and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were
but to my mind, though i am native here
and much offence too. Touching this vision here,
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
Hor. Peace! Who comes here?
that he, as 'twere by accident, may here
Ham. I would i had been there.
Fran. I think i hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
Ham. Do you see nothing there?
O hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre
'doubt thou the stars are fire;
Ham. What, frighted with false fire?
and gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
for every man hath business and desire,
as if it some impartment did desire
and thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
before you visit him, to make inquire
out of the shot and danger of desire.
Ham. I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
it is most retrograde to our desire;
no more.
Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that i will more
'one fair daughter, and no more,
eyes. Prithee no more!
Laer. Think it no more.
makes vow before his uncle never more
Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
elsinore.
Scene. - elsinore.
hunts not the trail of policy so sure
Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.
have you so slander any moment leisure
make you at elsinore?
and pity 'tis 'tis true. A foolish figure!
a violet in the youth of primy nature,
Ham. I am constant to my purposes; they follow the king's pleasure.
or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
doth rend the region; so, after pyrrhus' pause,
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
making night hideous, and we fools of nature
that grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
be otherwise.
Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those
shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose
and i do doubt the hatch and the disclose
end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
I had my father's signet in my purse,
a fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
We heard it all. - my lord, do as you please;
Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?
phrase.
in obstinate condolement is a course
as any the most vulgar thing to sense,
hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
Ham. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?
half a year. But, by'r lady, he must build churches then; or else
Laer. What ceremony else?
for this effect defective comes by cause.
like john-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet i could accuse
Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
Ham. The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
let me be no assistant for a state,
of his true state.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
This above all- to thine own self be true,
King. [aside] o, 'tis too true!
Hor. As i do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;
Ham. So you must take your husbands. - begin, murtherer. Pox, leave
occasion smiles upon a second leave.
i'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
for the demand of our neglected tribute.
or such ambiguous giving out, to note
look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
give it an understanding but no tongue.
rey. My lord, i have.
Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
Leaps in the grave.
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
reckon my groans; but that i love thee best, o most best, believe
Ham. Into my grave?
Pol. It shall do well. But yet do i believe
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
as of a father; for let the world take note
Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
but he's an arrant knave.
and makes us rather bear those ills we have
Why, what an ass am i! This is most brave,
beck than i have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give
taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.
Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
as vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;
and thy commandment all alone shall live
bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
Fare you well, my dove!
as meditation or the thoughts of love,
This is the very ecstasy of love,
and with no less nobility of love
but never doubt i love.
doubt that the sun doth move;
This must be known; which, being kept close, might move
as hardy as the nemean lion's nerve.
Oph. My lord, he hath importun'd me with love
more grief to hide than hate to utter love.
If thou didst ever thy dear father love-
Ham. As woman's love.
Pol. Mad for thy love?
receiv'd his love?
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
Guil. Faith, her privates we.
his love.
Ham. Ay, so, god b' wi' ye!
no, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Ham. Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.
here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
not off.
Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of
altitude of a chopine. Pray god your voice, like a piece of
Ham. Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
than fly to others that we know not of?
of impious stubbornness. 'tis unmanly grief;
but with a crafty madness keeps aloof
and can say nothing! No, not for a king,
did nothing.
even in their promise, as it is a-making,
both to my god and to my gracious king;
Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief
Ham. [comes forward] what is he whose grief
little. 'sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
Queen. Good hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
being a thing immortal as itself?
so much from th' understanding of himself,
Fran. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
given private time to you, and you yourself
Woo't weep? Woo't fight? Woo't fast? Woo't tear thyself?
must render up myself.
pol. Observe his inclination in yourself.
how strange or odd soe'er i bear myself
Horatio! - or i do forget myself.
nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of
neck. He lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She, seeing
speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
more relative than this. The play's the thing
roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing
sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
Ham. Nothing.
as one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;
Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the king.
Ham. An earnest conjuration from the king,
For. Go, captain, from me greet the danish king.
Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
as 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling
in censure of his seeming.
Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing
Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?
Fran. Not a mouse stirring.
Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,
forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;
in going back to school in wittenberg,
I pray thee stay with us, go not to wittenberg.
awake the god of day; and at his warning,
Rey. Good my lord! [going. ]
The canker galls the infants of the spring
a broken voice, and his whole function suiting
and sure i am two men there are not living
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
Pol. This is too long.
Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?
believe so much in him, that he is young,
Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, guildenstern? Ah,
but what, in faith, make you from wittenberg?
Ham. And smelt so? Pah!
Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore. Your hands, come! Th'
ros. Will't please you go, my lord?
hor. E'en so, my lord.
will you walk out of the air, my lord?
hor. You will lose this wager, my lord.
laer. What out of this, my lord?
Oph. What means this, my lord?
Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
Capt. I will do't, my lord.
Laer. What part is that, my lord?
Ros. I understand you not, my lord.
Hor. It might, my lord.
Hor. Ay, my lord.
the woman will be out. Adieu, my lord.
the ratifiers and props of every word,
till then in patience our proceeding be.
Queen. How fares my lord?
And for that purpose i'll anoint my sword.
horatio. A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He
dramatis personae
what is't to leave betimes? Let be.
Ham. That i can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be
This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,
King. Thanks, dear my lord.
Ros. Ho, guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
Laer. Ay my lord,
with less remorse than pyrrhus' bleeding sword
Ber. He.
the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
to fust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be
where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
so you will not o'errule me to a peace.
Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face.
unto that element; but long it could not be
Get you a place.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
on fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
a sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,
offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
unbated and envenom'd. The foul practice
Break we our watch up; and by my advice
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
to exploit now ripe in my device,
and that our drift look through our bad performance.
Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
It will be laid to us, whose providence
May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
Laer. [aside] and yet it is almost against my conscience.
and call the noblest to the audience.
Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
Sir, in this audience,
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
to offer it the show of violence;
Pray you pass with your best violence;
importing health and graveness. Two months since
it shall as level to your judgment pierce
a pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
o, a pit of clay for to be made
all from her father's death. O gertrude, gertrude,
He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,
you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is i see.
if this did blast in proof. Soft! Let me see.
to keep those many many bodies safe
guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.
upon whose property and most dear life
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
pursued my life.
to grunt and sweat under a weary life,
shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of gonzago's wife.
You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife,
When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;
you cannot call it love; for at your age
'tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage
King. Arm you, i pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
to have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
we may of their encounter frankly judge
of the unworthiest siege.
that even our loves should with our fortunes change;
or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Laer. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
and many such-like as's of great charge,
King. But where is he?
Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the
Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile. Let a beast be
but fill unshaken when they mellow be.
i have a voice and precedent of peace
A double blessing is a double grace;
but it reserv'd some quantity of choice
even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
there falling out at tennis'; or perchance,
defence?
for art and exercise in your defence,
be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,
he smote the sledded polacks on the ice.
but even his mother shall uncharge the practice
her brother is in secret come from france;
for that which thou hast done, - must send thee hence
and with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience
to prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
led by a delicate and tender prince,
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
[sings] o, a pit of clay for to be made
wantonness your ignorance. Go to, i'll no more on't! It hath made
the lists, and full proportions are all made
which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,
and let all sleep, while to my shame i see
your leave and favour to return to france;
but to confront the visage of offence?
that both the world, i give to negligence,
each small annexment, petty consequence,
why thou art thus incens'd. Let him go, gertrude.
why seems it so particular with thee?
what part a gentleman would see.
that so his sickness, age, and impotence
unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
the instant burst of clamour that she made
your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:
thrown out his angle for my proper life,
should be as mortal as an old man's life?
both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
unto young hamlet; for, upon my life,
if, once a widow, ever i be wife!
with mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
when he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
bear hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
till of this flat a mountain you have made
the serpent that did sting thy father's life
i hop'd thou shouldst have been my hamlet's wife;
for by the image of my cause i see
yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
Enter fortinbras with his army over the stage.
'tis strange.
bellow for revenge.
the triumph of his pledge.
he.
[the attendants part them, and they come out of the
earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he
when the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the
when i shall (first asking your pardon thereunto) recount the
is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the
hath turn'd itself on me. Lo, here i lie,
and breath of life, i have no life to breathe
when he himself might his quietus make
that thy rebellion looks so giantlike?
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
with arms encumb'red thus, or this head-shake,
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make
the nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
King. The doors are broke.
clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
the need we have to use you did provoke
Your grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
King. Let's follow, gertrude.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
work; but what o' that? Your majesty, and we that have free
Hor. What is it you will see?
In thee there is not half an hour of life.
with, hoo! Such bugs and goblins in my life-
stood challenger on mount of all the age
the speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
Clown. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
Pol. Very like a whale.
Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake
Ber. How now, horatio? You tremble and look pale.
would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;
King. 'tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
absent thee from felicity awhile,
nor will it yield to norway or the pole
that from a shelf the precious diadem stole
bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
Elsinore. A hall in the castle.
Elsinore. A passage in the castle.
your table!
King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while.
depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
Ber. Sit down awhile,
that's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile
My spirits grow dull, and fain i would beguile
ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle;
stopping a bunghole?
upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
when yond same star that's westward from the pole
Elsinore. A platform before the castle.
Elsinore. A room of state in the castle.
A room in the castle.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Elsinore. Another room in the castle.
Elsinore. Another room in the castle.
a cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
Quoth she, 'before you tumbled me,
to speak of horrors- he comes before me.
King. Come, hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
speak to me.
you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
Laer. Come, one for me.
pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
they shall go far with little.
and they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
(things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me!
can you advise me?
which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
i am afeard you make a wanton of me.
you cannot play upon me.
Who is't that can inform me?
how all occasions do inform against me
But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
will you be rul'd by me?
I can no more. The king, the king's to blame.
O good horatio, what a wounded name
image of a murther done in vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name;
King. The very same.
ham. Why, i will fight with him upon this theme
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
if his chief good and market of his time
Hor. What are they that would speak with me?
I pray you go with me.
to punish me with this, and this with me,
Laer. It well appears. But tell me
would make them capable. - do not look upon me,
Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
Queen. Have you forgot me?
and set a double varnish on the fame
where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
you must not take for fire. From this time
that liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
to keep my name ungor'd. But till that time
church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
to let this canker of our nature come
Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come!
her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
Be as ourself in denmark. Madam, come.
for her perfections. But my revenge will come.
There with fantastic garlands did she come
Will return'd shall know you are come home.
ham. He will stay till you come.
to hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
Ham. You are welcome.
In the most high and palmy state of rome,
Mar. And liegemen to the dane.
I am more an antique roman than a dane.
his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
this, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
what thou hast said to me.
and do't the speedier that you may direct me
that may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
to do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me.
in noise so rude against me?
that for a fantasy and trick of fame
alack, and fie for shame!
transports his poisoned shot- may miss our name
take longer time.
why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
but that i know love is begun by time,
and melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
by cock, they are to blame.
to reason most absurd, whose common theme
all in the morning bedtime,
to any pastime?
that hath in it no profit but the name.
not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:
that, if again this apparition come,
and that, i hope, will teach you to imagine-
King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
the thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;
whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene
to be your valentine.
Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
the bell then beating one-
from another one?
to those of mine!
to you yourself, to us, to every one.
ere you had done.
Away! For everything is seal'd and done
make us again count o'er ere love be done!
with sore distraction. What i have done
If there be any good thing to be done,
shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.
and thou must cure me. Till i know 'tis done,
Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
yet now i must confess, that duty done,
he is dead and gone;
even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
He is gone, he is gone,
Mar. 'tis gone!
attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
to you alone.
and in a postscript here, he says 'alone. '
at his heels a stone.
would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
singeing his pate against the burning zone,
o'er whom his very madness, like some ore
let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
i have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
to be contracted in one brow of woe,
Ber. Who's there. ?
but, like the owner of a foul disease,
thee where i am. Rosencrantz and guildenstern hold their course
for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
there was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
this mad young man. But so much was our love
letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of
this, give these fellows some means to the king. They have
Ber. Long live the king!
let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
to desperation turn my trust and hope,
where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring. - masters, you are
by william shakespeare
Hor. 'tis here!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
what, is horatio there ?
or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
Clown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'a shall recover his wits there;
what is the issue of the business there.
to england send him; or confine him where
to their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
exposing what is mortal and unsure
when it prov'd otherwise. ?
so crimeful and so capital in nature,
as by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
never departed more.
Queen. O, speak to me no more!
Queen. No more!
Queen. O hamlet, speak no more!
within the centre.
'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature,
The terms of our estate may not endure
Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the scripture?
last, and as such containing as all these,
through your dominions for this enterprise,
(as how should it be so? How otherwise? ),
true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else
laer. What ceremony else?
sense.
as my great power thereof may give thee sense,
or but a sickly part of one true sense
in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those
the passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
to business with the king, more than the scope
thou com'st in such a questionable shape
to all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Ber. 'tis here!
and think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
among a mineral of metals base,
they clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase
whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose,
and to such wondrous doing brought his horse
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
this bodes some strange eruption to our state.
that else leans on th' affair. Pray you make haste.
th' effect of what i wrote?
Enter prologue.
who was in life a foolish peating knave.
those that would make mows at him while my father lived give
to contract- o- the time for- a- my behove,
are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
no, not to stay the finding of the axe,
Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
with an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
sir, - it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for england- if
Enter hamlet and horatio afar off.
and live the purer with the other half,
when down her weedy trophies and herself
and oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
whose violent property fordoes itself
where now it burns, marcellus and myself,
very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
till doomsday. Go, get thee to yaughan; fetch me a stoup of
what company, at what expense; and finding
virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
Ber. I have seen nothing.
that carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
o thou vile king,
This man shall set me packing.
and cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
do not itself unkennel in one speech,
and now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though
and for your part, ophelia, i do wish
(for which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
with pestilent speeches of his father's death,
why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
when he lay couched in the ominous horse,
and with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
'tis told me he hath very oft of late
to tell the secrets of my prison house,
Queen. What have i done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
the pith and marrow of our attribute.
collected from all simples that have virtue
is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
Hor. Before my god, i might not this believe
whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
as it doth well appear unto our state,
Laer. I pray you give me leave.
Queen. What would she have?
By the mass, i was about to say something! Where did i leave?
to make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
first mouth'd, to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
i could not but by her. The other motive
Anon, as patient as the female dove
buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love,
whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
my head should be struck off.
burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
are shot off.
if it be made of penetrable stuff;
he swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
yet the unshaped use of it doth move
Hor. As thou art to thyself.
know, to divide him inventorially would dozy th' arithmetic of
as day does to your eye.
we shall express our duty in his eye;
together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
it sends some precious instance of itself
keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of
The king is a thing-
confederate season, else no creature seeing;
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
tell me one thing.
Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
of a king?
i'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,
to lack discretion. Come, go we to the king.
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
purpose, confess thyself-
Behind the arras i'll convey myself
his wife, baptista. You shall see anon. 'tis a knavish piece of
or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
until my eyelids will no longer wag.
at his head a grass-green turf,
'laertes shall be king! Laertes king! '
Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing
are unwrung.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
under the moon, can save the thing from death
comes armed through our watch, so like the king
Mar. Is it not like the king?
Enter king.
when thou liest howling.
ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
when i had seen this hot love on the wing
At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?
his replies are! A happiness that often madness hits on, which
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the french
craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
[to laertes] strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.
and i with them the third night kept the watch;
as if i had never been such.
Mar. Nor i, my lord- in faith.
as love between them like the palm might flourish,
but that the dread of something after death-
which i have told thee, of my father's death.
is by a forged process of my death
his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
and hears it roar beneath.
That i am guiltless of your father's death,
Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
rawer breath
Hor. In faith,
tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:
Other. Why, he had none.
i will speak daggers to her, but use none.
drink off this potion! Is thy union here?
the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
that, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
that youth and observation copied there,
hath in the skirts of norway, here and there,
Near elsinore.
Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.
grop'd i to find out them; had my desire,
Laer. I am satisfied in nature,
you heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
you are the most immediate to our throne,
that swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe,
these but the trappings and the suits of woe.
an anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,
could not so mope.
of jove himself; and now reigns here
Laer. Drown'd! O, where?
King. At supper? Where?
to keep itself from noyance; but much more
But what is your affair in elsinore?
and from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
our purpose may hold there. - but stay, what noise,
or with a little shuffling, you may choose
else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
for use almost can change the stamp of nature,
for food and diet, to some enterprise
that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
King. [aside] it is the poison'd cup; it is too late.
Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
the perfume and suppliance of a minute;
But break my heart, for i must hold my tongue!
that i have shot my arrow o'er the house
Pol. 'tis most true;
which we do tender as we dearly grieve
and our affairs from england come too late.
the safety and health of this whole state,
and not have strew'd thy grave.
pound! Didst perceive?
they find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
Ham. Nay, but to live
There lives within the very flame of love
Oph. Still better, and worse.
that your good beauties be the happy cause
so far from cheer and from your former state.
fordo it own life. 'twas of some estate.
Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
the rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
grave. ]
In youth when i did love, did love,
for 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
could not (with all their quantity of love)
And you the judges, bear a wary eye.
after the danish sword, and thy free awe
from the fair forehead of an innocent love,
i do receive your offer'd love like love,
King. No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;
the origin and commencement of his grief
King. Laertes, i must commune with your grief,
Queen. The instances that second marriage move
I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze
the devil himself.
A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.
By his cockle bat and' staff
excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.
that to laertes i forgot myself,
lives almost by his looks; and for myself, -
and that i see, in passages of proof,
that rots itself in ease on lethe wharf,
hyperion's curls; the front of jove himself;
Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself
I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'the murther of
fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], king,
pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of
Enter a king and a queen very lovingly; the queen embracing
this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?
with forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
Queen. As kill a king?
they cry 'choose we! Laertes shall be king! '
the king.
But soft! But soft! Aside! Here comes the king-
there is a play to-night before the king.
This is one lucianus, nephew to the king.
Then, venom, to thy work. Hurts the king.
Ham. Nay, i know not. Is it the king?
that shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; i hear him coming.
enter king.
Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
his silence will sit drooping.
grave-making?
The ears are senseless that should give us bearing
a chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
most generous, and free from all contriving,
the puppets dallying.
Ham. Now might i do it pat, now he is praying;
Therefore i have entreated him along,
ham. Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
Ham. Am i not i' th' right, old jephthah?
and thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
taste of your quality. Come, a passionate speech.
I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the french,
my virtue or my plague, be it either which, -
against the which he has impon'd, as i take it, six french
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
i your commission will forthwith dispatch,
Laer. To cut his throat i' th' church!
why this same strict and most observant watch
(marcellus and bernardo) on their watch
hath clawed me in his clutch,
a baseness to write fair, and labour'd much
and then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
that swift as quicksilverr it courses through
stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;
Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
and from her fair and unpolluted flesh
had i but time (as this fell sergeant, death,
Fort. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
it may be death.
he should the bearers put to sudden death,
or thinking by our late dear brother's death
to muddy death.
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
the king shall drink to hamlet's better breath,
Laer. Lay her i' th' earth;
Hor. Not from his mouth,
Queen. He's fat, and scant of breath.
Ham. I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath
yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath
here's to thy health.
giving more light than heat, extinct in both
King. I do not fear it, i have seen you both;
Ham. Who, i?
Ham. A whole one i!
not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as i
better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with
We'll put the matter to the present push. -
than i to hercules. Within a month,
by what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
Ham. Dost thou think alexander look'd o' this fashion i' th' earth?
Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge i
Scene ii.
Pol. If you call me jephthah, my lord, i have a daughter that i
Act v. Scene i.
o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that i
Scene ii.
o, speak!
Hor. Of that i shall have also cause to speak,
of reverend priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.
so levied as before, against the polack;
or my dear majesty your queen here, think,
Enter hamlet, reading on a book.
a very noble youth. Mark.
Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to denmark.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
than the main voice of denmark goes withal.
Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
with variable objects, shall expel
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall
And so, without more circumstance at all,
Pol. God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!
Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his majesty shall
It is a poison temper'd by himself.
with fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
appears before them and with solemn march
Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 'a pour'd a flagon of
that he could nothing do but wish and beg
out of his subject; and we here dispatch
with martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. But, sir, such
the bird of dawning singeth all night long;
plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
without the sensible and true avouch
that i shall live and tell him to his teeth,
for, though i am not splenitive and rash,
Ham. No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
Sound a flourish. [enter trumpets and kettledrums. Danish
He never gave commandment for their death.
King. Though yet of hamlet our dear brother's death
Ham. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
rankly abus'd. But know, thou noble youth,
Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, i
O what a rogue and peasant slave am i!
Ambassador. The sight is dismal;
Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
Hor. My lord, i came to see your father's funeral.
Ham. We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel;
prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
King. It likes us well;
Ham. Thou pray'st not well.
Ham. That's two of his weapons- but well.
Ham. I am glad to see you well.
Farewell.
Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
King. We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
Ham. To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
Ham. O my prophetic soul!
Ham. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
now falls on priam.
'that can denote me truly. These indeed seem,
God 'a'mercy on his soul!
Laer. The devil take thy soul!
Ham. Good madam!
speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
Hor. I did very well note him.
Hor. A piece of him.
King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
Must i remember? Why, she would hang on him
King. I pray thee, good horatio, wait upon him.
Ham. Let me see. [takes the skull. ] alas, poor yorick! I knew him,
1. Play. 'anon he finds him,
sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
Ham. How does the queen?
Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman
King. Well, we shall sift him.
Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
Ham. What woman then?
A noise within: 'let her come in. '
Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in
piece of work is a man! How noble in reason! How infinite in
will bring him to his wonted way again,
Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into france i have been in
within the book and volume of my brain,
since nature cannot choose his origin, -
Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard. - prithee say on.
so horridly to shake our disposition
shall in the general censure take corruption
will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
1. Play. 'but who, o who, had seen the mobled queen-'
O heavy burthen!
show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
Ham. Up from my cabin,
revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
Ham. 'tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon. -
Ham. What's his weapon?
All. Treason! Treason!
Exit reynaldo.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
Ham. O, i die, horatio!
Ham. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
Ham. How if i answer no?
Ham. The point envenom'd too?
pleasant and helpful to him!
Queen. For love of god, forbear him!
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom
that is not passion's slave, and i will wear him
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless ilium,
so much as from occasion you may glean,
Ham. As th'art a man,
Ros. Most like a gentleman.
Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
Osr. The king, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
still am i call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the question:
Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-
suit of sables. O heavens! Die two months ago, and not forgotten
Come hither, gentlemen,
take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
than that which dearest father bears his son
or bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
players do, i had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do
For. Go softly on.
our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.
tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who
Enter polonius and reynaldo.
of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
Ham. But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
Enter polonius, rosencrantz, and guildenstern.
oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
Ham. He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. His name's gonzago.
Fran. Bernardo?
Ham. Between who?
or ever i had seen that day, horatio!
Exit horatio.
Enter horatio.
Hor. Ay, my lord, and of calveskins too.
Hor. E'en so.
Osr. Shall i redeliver you e'en so?
promise-cramm'd. You cannot feed capons so.
Hor. 'twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.
He closes thus: 'i know the gentleman.
with tristful visage, as against the doom,
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
Be you and i behind an arras then.
How now, sweet queen?
whose worth, if praises may go back again,
Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
with this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain!
that he might not beteem the winds of heaven
Give us the foils. Come on.
that flesh is heir to. 'tis a consummation
Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
Ham. Not so, my lord. I am too much i' th' sun.
(o god! A beast that wants discourse of reason
Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
th' observ'd of all observers- quite, quite down!
Hor. Well, sit we down,
now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
now wears his crown.
that he should weep for her? What would he do,
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
Ham. 'swounds, show me what thou't do.
that i have positively said ''tis so, '
Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so,
Ham. Ay, or any show that you'll show him. Be not you asham'd to
He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to
soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
'o dear ophelia, i am ill at these numbers; i have not art to
Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to
Ham. Bid the players make haste, [exit polonius. ] will you two
Both. We will, my lord. Exeunt they two.
Ham. Lady, shall i lie in your lap?
Ham. I mean, my head upon your lap?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
Hor. Hail to your lordship!
would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father
Ham. But where was this?
Ham. Are you fair?
Ham. Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
o wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
King. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?
Osr. I commend my duty to your lordship.
sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
with a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,
Give him the cup.
For thou dost know, o damon dear,
swear.
Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.
Ham. For god's love let me hear!
Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
Ghost. Swear.
Ghost. [beneath] swear.
Consent to swear.
will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Marcellus, officer.
Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:
King. Pluck thein asunder.
Ham. Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
Osr. Rapier and dagger.
Exit messenger.
Both. Longer, longer.
Ham. So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.
Ham. (within) mother, mother, mother!
queen. Came this from hamlet to her?
Ghost of hamlet's father.
than is the throne of denmark to thy father.
Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
Farewell, dear mother.
play something like the murther of my father
Good night, mother.
Ham. Why he more than another?
Hor [aside to hamlet] is't not possible to understand in another
Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
Francisco, a soldier
Osric, courtier.
Ham. At supper.
Guildenstern, courtier.
[reads] the letter.
Fear it, ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
Ham. 'tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier
of these dilated articles allow. [gives a paper. ]
pol. [aside] still on my daughter.
I lov'd you ever. But it is no matter.
Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
that i have longed long to re-deliver.
Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
Ham. Goes it against the main of poland, sir,
Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
Ghost. [beneath] swear.
Guil. No, my lord; rather with choler.
Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.
why does the drum come hither?
Ham. With drink, sir?
Guil. The king, sir-
Ham. Who commands them, sir?
Ham. Of him, sir.
Ham. I am very glad to see you. - [to bernardo] good even, sir. -
Ham. Come on, sir.
Ham. Hear you, sir!
God bless you, sir!
Ham. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'tis for
Ham. What man dost thou dig it for?
Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.
Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
Guil. My lord, we were sent for.
Pol. That did i, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour.
Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your
of his behaviour.
Player. I warrant your honour.
Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
strutted and bellowed that i have thought some of nature's
with windlasses and with assays of bias,
Now follows, that you know, young fortinbras,
Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the king's countenance, his rewards,
Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands
th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
Ham. Being thus benetted round with villanies,
1. Play. 'run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
Ham. That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.
Ham. I humbly thank you, sir. [aside to horatio] dost know this
Elsinore. The castle. Another part of the fortifications.
t' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
Ham. I lov'd ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
Ham. Do you think i meant country matters?
with most miraculous organ, i'll have these players
soil our addition; and indeed it takes
some little time; so by your companies
Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players
Enter hamlet and three of the players.
Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
So excellent a king, that was to this
Ham. Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
Exeunt players.
within 's two hours.
Pol. Come, sirs.
pol. Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's
[reads. ]
Ham. 'by-and-by' is easily said. - leave me, friends.
Out, out, thou strumpet fortune! All you gods,
Guil. Heavens make our presence and our practices
question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,
Ham. What call you the carriages?
Ham. A king of shreds and patches! -
Follow my mother. King dies.
Osr. The king, sir, hath wager'd with him six barbary horses;
What wouldst thou have, laertes?
Ham. That is laertes,
or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
passionate action. The poisoner with some three or four mutes,
King. O, he is mad, laertes.
Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence laertes is-
Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is;
alexander was buried, alexander returneth into dust; the dust is
scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
Ham. God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his
Ham. This?
pol. Wherefore should you do this?
possess it merely. That it should come to this!
Flourish. [enter king and queen, rosencrantz and guildenstern, cum aliis.
old grandsire priam seeks. '
Ham. Nay come! Again! The queen falls.
Guil. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
Mad call i it; for, to define true madness,
with thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
Ham. Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
Flourish for the players.
Most welcome home! Exeunt ambassadors.
Hor. Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.
seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts
Exeunt king and queen, [with attendants].
But you shall hear. Thus:
Elsinore. A room in the house of polonius.
with eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhus
King. Have you your father's leave? What says polonius?
Exit [polonius].
What is the reason that you use me thus?
Marcellus?
Elsinore. A room in the house of polonius.
Speak of it! Stay, and speak! - stop it, marcellus!
strumpet. What news ?
Enter hamlet, horatio, and marcellus.
Here, hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.
Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
Ham. I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.
reputation and profit, was better both ways.
Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
Ham. Ay, marry, is't;
Tweaks me by th' nose? Gives me the lie i' th' throat
[sits down at ophelia's feet. ]
Hor. Why, what a king is this!
Her father and myself (lawful espials)
Ham. Seems, madam, nay, it is. I know not 'seems. '
or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
Fort. Let four captains
with blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears
that i have? He would drown the stage with tears
Two clowns, gravediggers.
Players.
of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
without debatement further, more or less,
Ham. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
with true-love showers.
that it might please you to give quiet pass
Queen. This is mere madness;
Who calls me villain? Breaks my pate across?
Ham. Thrift, thrift, horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
Guil. There are the players.
with witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts-
Lords, ladies, officers, soldiers, sailors, messengers, attendants.
without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
For your desire to know what is between us,
polonius, laertes and his sister ophelia, [voltemand, cornelius, ]
Ophelia, daughter to polonius.
Enter polonius.
Enter polonius.
Enter polonius.
Exit [polonius].
Enter horatio and marcellus.
on fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
Gent. She is importunate, indeed distract.
King. 'tis sweet and commendable in your nature, hamlet,
Enter ghost and hamlet.
that i will speak to thee. I'll call thee hamlet,
Here's yet some liquor left.
If you do meet horatio and marcellus,
question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous
Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
Pol. I did enact julius caesar; i was kill'd i' th' capitol; brutus
sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in't
Pol. [to the king] o, ho! Do you mark that?
Hor. So guildenstern and rosencrantz go to't.
Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
Ham. What did you enact?
Hor. Good my lord, be quiet.
Queen. Hamlet, hamlet!
Exeunt ghost and hamlet.
Gentlemen. (within) hamlet! Lord hamlet!
than a command to parley. For lord hamlet,
This gentle and unforc'd accord of hamlet
King. Give them the foils, young osric. Cousin hamlet,
King. How fares our cousin hamlet?
Horatio, friend to hamlet.
Getrude, queen of denmark, mother to hamlet.
Ghost beckons hamlet.
But you'll be secret?
Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
Fran. Give you good night.
with us to watch the minutes of this night,
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
that ever i was born to set it right!
termagant. It out-herods herod. Pray you avoid it.
sir, though i most powerfully and potently believe, yet i hold it
Ham. Why, then the polack never will defend it.
with the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thought
Ham. Yours, yours. [exit osric. ] he does well to commend it
Hor. Never believe it.
Ham. Do not believe it.
Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
They are not near my conscience; their defeat
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
or rather say, the cause of this defect,
tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, hamlet.
Exeunt [all but hamlet].
oph. My lord, as i was sewing in my closet,
Ham. Haste me to know't, that i, with wings as swift
that lend a tyrannous and a damned light
or 'if we list to speak, ' or 'there be, an if they might, '
Fort. Where is this sight?
with wondrous potency. Once more, good night;
or look'd upon this love with idle sight?
than your particular demands will touch it.
To pay five ducats, five, i would not farm it;
Hor. So have i heard and do in part believe it.
But do not go with it!
A table and flagons of wine on it.
Ham. Did you not speak to it?
Fort. Let us haste to hear it,
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
Guil. The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
Exit.
Exit.
Exit.
Exit.
of general assault.
Give you good night. Exit.
Ham. Judgment!
take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Ham. Whose was it?
Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,
Adieu, adieu, adieu! Remember me. Exit.
Osr. I know you are not ignorant-
Exit.
Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.
Hor. [aside to hamlet] i knew you must be edified by the margent
Ham. Sir, i lack advancement.
Ham. O that this too too solid flesh would melt,
Ham. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Osr. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
not.
King. I have nothing with this answer, hamlet. These words are not
Both. My lord, we will not.
i cannot dream of. I entreat you both
visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
extorted treasure in the womb of earth
cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
'this must be so. ' we pray you throw to earth
the cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
to hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
for he himself is subject to his birth.
videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
i would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
holding a weak supposal of our worth,
make ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
the hand more instrumental to the mouth,
King. A very riband in the cap of youth-
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
Act iii. Scene i.
Act ii. Scene i.
fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can i
Be buried quick with her, and so will i.
boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so i
them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as i
that unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
and in the morn and liquid dew of youth
pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, i
Pol. With what, i' th' name of god i
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which i
like wonder-wounded hearers? This is i,
as i do thee. Something too much of this i
Scene ii.
Scene ii.
your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
How much i had to do to calm his rage i
slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple i
Act i. Scene i.
Act iv. Scene i.
Hor. That can i.
Scene iii.
Scene iii.
scene vi.
a dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.
itself to motion, like as it would speak;
Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
Queen. Nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.
King. I do believe you think what now you speak;
what should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
and my young mistress thus i did bespeak:
Queen. Alack,
to be a preparation 'gainst the polack,
and curd, like eager droppings into milk,
Clown. Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk
Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
King. Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
we will bestow ourselves. - [to ophelia] read on this book,
I bought an unction of a mountebank,
so bloodily hast struck.
King. Gertrude, do not drink.
my sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
if i had play'd the desk or table book,
who in her duty and obedience, mark,
Couch we awhile, and mark.
Yet i,
my lord, not i.
Ham. No, not i!
Scene iii.
did sometimes march? By heaven i charge thee speak!
Ham. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly i
Scene ii.
Scene vii.
for murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
but from what cause he will by no means speak.
in which the majesty of buried denmark
and let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
Ham. There's neer a villain dwelling in all denmark
and let thine eye look like a friend on denmark.
air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical
and marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
King. Why, now you speak
does not divide the sunday from the week.
Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
the tragedy of hamlet, prince of denmark
What might you think? No, i went round to work
King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
nor customary suits of solemn black,
a very, very- pajock.
Mar. No, it is struck.
wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
as it did seem to shatter all his bulk
Oph. Say you? Nay, pray you mark.
a serpent stung me. So the whole ear of denmark
Oph. Where is the beauteous majesty of denmark?
for your succession in denmark?
aroused vengeance sets him new awork;
which was the model of that danish seal;
where every god did seem to set his seal
(my fears forgetting manners) to unseal
as e'er my conversation cop'd withal.
laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial
of bell and burial.
with juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
His means of death, his obscure funeral-
history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
but this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock
and with a larger tether may he walk
if he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
as level as the cannon to his blank,
your wisdom best shall think.
breeding but to play at loggets with 'em? Mine ache to think
the first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look
till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
oph. Pray you mark.
How now, my lord? Will the king hear this piece of work?
why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
doth all the noble substance often dout to his own scandal.
gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' christian burial.
Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.
what's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
that thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
and bear it to the chapel.
was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
when we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
into a toil?
in further evil?
let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil
to hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil
but what we do determine oft we break.
and that his soul may be as damn'd and black
Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Oph. I do not know, my lord, what i should think,
what forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
and, in this upshot, purposes mistook
claudius, king of denmark.
Mar. Something is rotten in the state of denmark.
The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it christian burial.
from whence though willingly i came to denmark
break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
from that particular fault. The dram of e'il
The scripture says adam digg'd. Could he dig without arms? I'll
not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
they'll tell all.
His liberty is full of threats to all-
Ber. Last night of all,
or not at all.
the better to beguile. This is for all:
ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all.
do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;
and bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
and where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
to be forestalled ere we come to fall,
but i am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
as if he had been loosed out of hell
bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
and let me wring your heart; for so i shall
Other. Marry, now i can tell!
the which he loved passing well. '
Laer. Farewell, ophelia, and remember well
thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
of unimproved mettle hot and full,
our sovereign process, which imports at full,
that you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
what feast is toward in thine eternal cell
a little ere the mightiest julius fell,
Other. Mass, i cannot tell.
but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
love passing well.
as we have warranty. Her death was doubtful;
to take him in the purging of his soul,
when the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
(unless things mortal move them not at all)
Pol. Madam, i swear i use no art at all.
O shame! Where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
may fit us to our shape. If this should fall,
and never did the cyclops' hammers fall
under the which he shall not choose but fall;
Ham. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
King. So you shall;
And for my means, i'll husband them so well
Mar. O, wonderful!
even with the very comment of thy soul
entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them
this spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
at his post; then] bernardo, [who approaches him].
to bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
then goes he to the length of all his arm,
of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
faculties! In form and moving how express and admirable! In
escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can
the unseen good old man.
to cast thee up again. What may this mean
for the apparel oft proclaims the man,
Enter horatio, queen, and a gentleman.
Clown. I like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
our indiscretion sometime serves us well
Queen. Did he receive you well?
I will requite your loves. So, fare you well.
Pol. 'and in part him, but, ' you may say, 'not well.
Laer. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.
for england. Of them i have much to tell thee. Farewell.
My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
nowhere but in's own house. Farewell.
Pol. Farewell!
Ham. Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
King. Let him demand his fill.
Ham. I will.
to show us so much gentry and good will
walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
new lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
we must with all our majesty and skill
have not the skill.
a silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
Ham. It waves me still.
Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.
no traveller returns- puzzles the will,
and reason panders will.
and thy best graces spend it at thy will!
[puts down the skull. ]
Throws up [another skull].
Pol. Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
O, step between her and her fighting soul
and my imaginations are as foul
the inward service of the mind and soul
and we shall jointly labour with your soul
was not like madness. There's something in his soul
and not where i had aim'd them.
Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him!
did not together pluck such envy from him
did the first murther! This might be the pate of a politician,
thou canst not then be false to any man.
gentleman. '
'good sir, ' or so, or 'friend, ' or 'gentleman'-
I pray you, now receive them.
but our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
King. From hamlet? Who brought them?
that, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
(for so this side of our known world esteem'd him)
this night to play before him.
Hor. Heaven secure him!
and will not let belief take hold of him
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
to show his grief. Let her be round with him;
no more to undertake it, i will work him
him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
and thus a while the fit will work on him.
Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Pol. At such a time i'll loose my daughter to him.
more than his father's death, that thus hath put him
to our most valiant brother. So much for him.
Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
Mar. Let's follow. 'tis not fit thus to obey him.
a thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
no fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
But, as we often see, against some storm,
the soul of nero enter this firm bosom.
act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
and, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
Enter fortinbras and english ambassadors, with drum,
the point: if i drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an
to give the world assurance of a man.
and, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
to sound what stop she please. Give me that man
but pardon't, as you are a gentleman.
Other. Was he a gentleman?
and we cast away moan.
and thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen
would perhaps trouble a woman.
[exit gentleman. ]
O most pernicious woman!
did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
about the world have times twelve thirties been,
Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
and nothing is at a like goodness still;
let it be tenable in your silence still;
All. We will, we will!
Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
rough-hew them how we will-
though inclination be as sharp as will.
of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will
Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
Hor. I warr'nt it will.
make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
know if your pleasure hold to play with laertes, or that you will
all flaxen was his poll.
[throws up a skull. ]
that we are made of stuff so flat and dull
Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
she's so conjunctive to my life and soul
lay not that flattering unction to your soul
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
i hold my duty as i hold my soul,
the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
They were given me by claudio; he receiv'd them
you must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
ham. Ay, sir, what of him?
[grapples with him].
addicted so and so'; and there put on him
'thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him.
and to the manner born, it is a custom
that shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
this sudden sending him away must seem
which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
help to hasten them?
King. Laertes, you shall hear them.
of him that brought them.
and from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.
that, being of so young clays brought up with him,
we o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
Pray you be round with him.
and that he calls for drink, i'll have prepar'd him
we cannot get from him.
You must not put another scandal on him,
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
that we with wisest sorrow think on him
speak loudly for him.
is the great love the general gender bear him,
let his queen mother all alone entreat him
Queen. Did you assay him
Queen. But not by him!
I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room. -
Hor. Is it a custom?
in filial obligation for some term
Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
the glass of fashion and the mould of form,
Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen.
ham. 'the mobled queen'?
have not craft enough to colour. I know the good king and queen
Ham. My lord, i have news to tell you. When roscius was an actor in
Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
and how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
and prologue to the omen coming on,
thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
together with that fair and warlike form
How now o what hath befall'n?
and there assume some other, horrible form
honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
that i might be the organ.
Ham. Then i would you were so honest a man.
Speak, man.
holds such an enmity with blood of man
and spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
newly come to court laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me- no, nor woman
let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman! -
King. A norman.
Fie on't! Ah, fie! 'tis an unweeded garden
like a good child and a true gentleman.
ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
hath scald thee for herself. For thou hast been
Mar. Shall i strike at it with my partisan?
and in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
and gem of all the nation.
amazement and admiration.
about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution,
me, whether you were sent for or no.
and as my love is siz'd, my fear is so.
and his sandal shoon.
and let him know so.
have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
and foreign mart for implements of war;
But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.
'lord hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
and hurt my brother.
Ham. Murther?
may give his saying deed; which is no further
Ham. Nay, do not think i flatter;
How now, ophelia? What's the matter?
But soft! Methinks i scent the morning air.
may be a devil; and the devil hath power
married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
it is a damned ghost that we have seen,
i know my course. The spirit that i have seen
what we two nights have seen.
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between
when honour's at the stake. How stand i then,
King. Will you know them then?
Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men
But if the gods themselves did see her then,
All. Gentlemen!
Exeunt gentlemen.
it shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
Hor. Not i, my lord, by heaven!
valanc'd since i saw thee last. Com'st' thou to' beard me in
Hor. Let them come in.
Queen. Let her come in.
All. No, let's come in!
honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in
again.
and stand a comma 'tween their amities,
make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes
and many more of the same bevy that i know the drossy age dotes
who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
and let us hear bernardo speak of this.
makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;
hautboys play. The dumb show enters.
and let us once again assail your ears,
Pol. [behind] o, i am slain!
would have reverted to my bow again,
Hamlet in madness hath polonius slain,
Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
Exeunt [all but the captain].
without more motive, into every brain
Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain
Queen. O hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
him and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation
a noise within.
Such was the very armour he had on
when we would bring him on to some confession
innovation.
Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.
Guil. But with much forcing of his disposition.
went to cuffs in the question.
if she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Where is your son?
But now, my cousin hamlet, and my son-
Enter two sentinels-[first, ] francisco, [who paces up and down
his greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
and break your own neck down.
to tell my story. [march afar off, and shot within. ]
to his confine; and of the truth herein
in honourable fashion.
i have in quick determination
Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern]
Let him go, gertrude. Do not fear our person.
Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! Sit you down
Exeunt [rosencrantz and guildenstern].
Queen. What shall i do?
with an entreaty, herein further shown,
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
Ham. Not this, by no means, that i bid you do:
Oph. You must sing 'a-down a-down, and you call him a-down-a. ' o,
But let that go.
Ham. What, ho, horatio!
No.
Exeunt all but hamlet and horatio.
Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
he knew me not at first. He said i was a fishmonger. He is far
Hor. Be rul'd. You shall not go.
O, ho!
Ham. Saw? Who?
Help, help, ho!
And what make you from wittenberg, horatio?
Ham. Yes, by saint patrick, but there is, horatio,
Enter hamlet and horatio.
if't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
you mainly were stirr'd up.
Ham. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
Hor. Let him bless thee too.
King. Sweet gertrude, leave us too;
Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to
Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her
Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
Laer. Let this be so.
Ham. You should not have believ'd me; for virtue cannot so
Pol. [behind] what, ho! Help, help, help!
The bark is ready and the wind at help,
Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear
Ham. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
Ham. Why, what should be the fear?
Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?
Ham. Speak. I am bound to hear.
Queen. I will not speak with her.
King. Conceit upon her father.
Hor. My lord, the king your father.
hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
would quake to look on. Soft! Now to my mother!
Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.
Ham. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
kissing carrion- have you a daughter?
Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
Laer. This nothing's more than matter.
Ham. The king my father?
Laer. Where is my father?
hither?
Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.
King. Alas, alas!
'it came to pass, as most like it was. '
lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
in general synod take away her power;
Mar. 'tis gone and will not answer.
Sailor. God bless you, sir.
King. Where are my switzers? Let them guard the door.
individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
Mar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
in mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
Ham. Words, words, words.
into the madness wherein now he raves,
himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
importing the surrender of those lands
Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
i'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
his further gait herein, in that the levies,
which have solicited- the rest is silence. Dies.
yet needfull too; for youth no less becomes
leaves him. The queen returns, finds the king dead, and makes
Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
King. What is the cause, laertes,
King. There's matter in these sighs. These profound heaves
Most holy and religious fear it is
Oph. (sings)
him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
King. What dost thou mean by this?
Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
Ham. These tedious old fools!
king of infinite space, were it not that i have bad dreams.
Laer. To his good friends thus wide i'll ope my arms
King. O, for two special reasons,
you i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.
Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
King. Bring him before us.
Laer. I thank you. Keep the door. [exeunt his followers. ]
King. Now, hamlet, where's polonius?
it lifted up it head and did address
ham. Then came each actor on his ass-
King. Go seek him there. [to attendants. ]
King. Where is polonius?
it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious
have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
Ham. Nay, but swear't.
hamlet. '
Queen. Why, how now, hamlet?
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble hamlet.
King. What, gertrude? How does hamlet?
in the dead vast and middle of the night
Ham. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights
yet have i in me something dangerous,
Ham. There's letters seal'd; and my two schoolfellows,
Hor. Not when i saw't.
Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at
Ham. What?
How does my good lord hamlet?
and therefore i forbid my tears; but yet
Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
Hold you the watch to-night?
Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night.
Ham. Why, right! You are in the right!
King. It falls right.
is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
a kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
it fits your wisdom so far to believe it
Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
Ham. No, you will reveal it.
Hor. Good my lord, tell it.
is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
i should have fatted all the region kites
in thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
he seem'd to find his way without his eyes,
Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
if with too credent ear you list his songs,
Hor. No, by no means!
Leave us.
hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws
i have sworn't.
How now? What news?
King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
i would know that.
Ham. I must to england; you know that?
Ham. Such an act
King. Ay, hamlet.
let us impart what we have seen to-night
if you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
Ham. So be it!
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
i chiefly lov'd. 'twas aeneas' tale to dido, and thereabout of it
Hor. My lord, i think i saw him yesternight.
Hor. It beckons you to go away with it,
Hor. Heaven will direct it.
wherein i'll catch the conscience of the king. Exit.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
which is not tomb enough and continent
lords attendant.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
Haply the seas, and countries different,
Exeunt.
insert in't, could you not?
Exeunt.
Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; i saw them not.
Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
Ham. Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?
Ham. Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
and gave you such a masterly report
and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
a face without a heart, '
in my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
It warms the very sickness in my heart
i hold it fit that we shake hands and part;
A priest.
Exit ghost.
Laer. And so have i a noble father lost;
Ham. My fate cries out
Laer. Where is this king? - sirs, staid you all without.
it. Adieu.
Who hath reliev'd you?
Hor. It would have much amaz'd you.
inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you
mark you,
it is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.
Enter [two players as] king and queen.
this to your majesty; this to the queen.
enter queen.
the will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
and that your grace hath screen'd and stood between
carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then.
your whoreson dead body. Here's a skull now. This skull hath lien
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
[exit queen. ]
the imminent death of twenty thousand men
the form of plausive manners, that these men
my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
the only men.
Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen!
unto our climature and countrymen.
So oft it chances in particular men
that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren
and bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
with almost all the holy vows of heaven.
had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
Would i had met my dearest foe in heaven
infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
will nothing stick our person to arraign
as oft as any passion under heaven
is very cunning in.
then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
ham. I dare not confess that, lest i should compare with him in
Laer. Well, again!
he never will come again.
And will he not come again?
But soft! Behold! Lo, where it comes again!
on plots and errors happen.
Queen. Ay, amen!
Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
upon the witness of these gentlemen,
against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
to heaven.
unmix'd with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
and now i'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
but never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
his authorities. But such officers do the king best service in
especially where he speaks of priam's slaughter. If it live in
[exit the queen. Then] exit hamlet, tugging in
your bounty. Take them in.
I shall not look upon his like again.
Mar. Peace! Break thee off! Look where it comes again!
Enter ghost again.
and will he not come again?
Perchance 'twill walk again.
Queen. Sleep rock thy brain,
A norwegian captain.
And never come mischance between us twain!
Polonius, lord chamberlain.
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
and, as the world were now but to begin,
give, me superfluous death. A noise within.
But in battalions! First, her father slain;
whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
to put an antic disposition on),
King. Our son shall win.
i had forgot! 'tis so concluded on.
but, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
but in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
and the king's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
now fear i this will give it start again;
that he which hath your noble father slain
that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
laer. It is here, hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain;
Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,
Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain
'now the king drinks to hamlet. ' come, begin.
and we beseech you, bend you to remain
i stand in pause where i shall first begin,
hor. That is most certain.
[drum; trumpets sound; a piece goes off [within].
[march within. ]
and after we will both our judgments join
for he was likely, had he been put on,
and bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
and he not from his reason fall'n thereon
a scullion!
into a tow'ring passion.
against their own succession.
get from him why he puts on this confusion,
Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
to show my duty in your coronation,
The very place puts toys of desperation,
and could of men distinguish, her election
discretion.
had he the motive and the cue for passion
Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
hold up adam's profession.
seeks her own salvation?
Mar. Look with what courteous action
I'll cross it, though it blast me. - stay illusion!
this present object made probation.
if one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon
You laying these slight sullies on my son
demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son
which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
fay, i cannot reason.
both countenance and excuse. Ho, guildenstern!
Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
King. Welcome, dear rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
our wills and fates do so contrary run
Enter the ghost in his nightgown.
the undiscover'd country, from whose bourn
deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
that our devices still are overthrown;
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Clown. How can that be, unless she drown'd herself in her own
as are companions noted and most known
Pol. You shall do marvell's wisely, good reynaldo,
our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
Lord. My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young osric, who
[retires with horatio. ]
Mar. Question it, horatio.
to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
King. It shall be so.
other. Go to!
christians, nor the gait of christian, pagan, nor man, have so
himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.
Laer. No.
Ber. 'tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, francisco.
why yet i live to say 'this thing's to do, '
Ber. Looks it not like the king? Mark it, horatio.
Pol. Give him this money and these notes, reynaldo.
Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so.
the tedious day with sleep.
devoutly to be wish'd. To die- to sleep.
for some must watch, while some must sleep:
to try conclusions, in the basket creep
King. O, speak of that! That do i long to hear.
for out o' doors he went without their help
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together
doubt truth to be a liar;
A gentleman, courtier.
King. How may we try it further?
Rosencrantz, courtier.
giving to you no further personal power
[exit first player. ]
not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,
Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
Laer. For hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
denmark? - what, my young lady and mistress? By'r lady, your
amble, and you lisp; you nickname god's creatures and make your
Ham. I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your
Tell him that by his license fortinbras
Pol. Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful. [reads. ]
Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words
no noble rite nor formal ostentation, -
and they in france of the best rank and station
who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
and keep you in the rear of your affection,
according to the phrase or the addition
Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition,
by this encompassment and drift of question
that might your nature, honour, and exception
that i must call't in question.
and thus the native hue of resolution
why should we in our peevish opposition
by the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
for what we know must be, and is as common
On fortune's cap we are not the very button.
start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
[exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern. ]
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
and why such daily cast of brazen cannon
my custom always of the afternoon,
good gertrude, set some watch over your son. -
Ham. Denmark's a prison.
Enter king, rosencrantz, and guildenstern.
Enter king and queen, with rosencrantz and guildenstern.
that capability and godlike reason
[exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern
King. Thanks, rosencrantz and gentle guildenstern.
the cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
since frost itself as actively doth burn,
occasion of my sudden and more strange return.
your mother's commandment; if not, your pardon and my return
and thrice his head thus waving up and down,
Lord. The king and queen and all are coming down.
But, orderly to end where i begun,
'so would i 'a' done, by yonder sun,
they had begun the play. I sat me down;
and, as he drains his draughts of rhenish down,
My tables! Meet it is i set it down
as therein are set down.
[exit second clown. ]
antiquity forgot, custom not known,
and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go
dies in his own too-much. That we would do,
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, i will do
my stern effects. Then what i have to do
my operant powers their functions leave to do.
that you know aught of me- this is not to do,
O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
and end his being. That done, he lets me go,
and let them know both what we mean to do
do not as some ungracious pastors do,
and in part him. ' do you mark this, reynaldo?
Mar. Holla, bernardo!
which bewept to the grave did not go
gonzago'?
Ham. In my mind's eye, horatio.
There are more things in heaven and earth, horatio,
more than their even-christen. Come, my spade! There is no
discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no
very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.
such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
deserved at the hands of fortune that she sends you to prison
desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own
as if increase of appetite had grown
Oph. O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so
my good friends, i'll leave you till night. You are welcome to
bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
Lord. The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to
Oph. I shall th' effect of this good lesson keep
and by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
unpeg the basket on the house's top,
and, as i think, they have already order
This must not be. ' and then i prescripts gave her,
father?
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
and convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
drabbing. You may go so far.
My father- methinks i see my father.
entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father
my father's brother, but no more like my father
god willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;
Nay, come, let's go together.
and all we mourn for.
why the man dies. - i humbly thank you, sir.
Ham. Hold off your hands!
and in the porches of my ears did pour
Welcome, my good friends.
carve for himself, for on his choice depends
Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,
a man that fortune's buffets and rewards
by their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
for we have closely sent for hamlet hither,
Voltemand, courtier.
[gives a paper. ]
and, like a neutral to his will and matter,
and he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties
did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
The drink, the drink! I am poison'd. [dies. ]
Ros. [to polonius] god save you, sir!
Pol. Indeed, that is out o' th' air. [aside] how pregnant sometimes
Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes.
The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
and for the day confin'd to fast in fires,
of hamlet's wildness. So shall i hope your virtues
Volt. Most fair return of greetings and desires.
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings-
and more above, hath his solicitings,
Pol. You go to seek the lord hamlet. There he is.
and bring these gentlemen where hamlet is.
Pol. [points to his head and shoulder] take this from this, if this
King. Let's further think of this,
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
King. Do you think 'tis this?
enquire me first what danskers are in paris;
your visitation shall receive such thanks
Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
Queen. I will, my lord; i pray you pardon me. Drinks.
Spreads his arms.
Enter horatio, marcellus, and bernardo.
why to a public count i might not go
as infinite as man may undergo-
Osr. Look to the queen there, ho!
favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, horatio,
their grand commission; where i found, horatio
[exit horatio. ]
Mar. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, horatio.
but i am very sorry, good horatio,
scarcely lie in this box; and must th' inheritor himself have no
Ham. His beard was grizzled- no?
Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- hercules and his load too.
King. Faith, i must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
importing denmark's health, and england's too,
as he would draw it. Long stay'd he so.
if damned custom have not braz'd it so
Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
Other. Why, 'tis found so.
Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
i do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
the rather, if you could devise it so
neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
Oph. No more but so?
Ber. It would be spoke to.
Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!
ros. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. He sends to
and how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
Oph. What means your lordship?
will he nill he, he goes- mark you that. But if the water come to
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
a blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-
and i'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
almost to jelly with the act of fear,
all given to mine ear.
wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, hamlet, hear.
you nine year.
being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
Marcellus, officer.
and pious action we do sugar o'er
as hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
King. Not that i think you did not love your father;
dare scarce come thither.
Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.
but you must know, your father lost a father;
been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
as watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.
Ham. Hark you, guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer!
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
Other. Nay, but hear you, goodman delver!
Laer. You mock me, sir.
Player. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us, sir.
and since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,
as it behooves my daughter and your honour.
Pol. Upon my honour-
Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'tis too narrow for your
believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your
affectation; but call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
as low as to the fiends!
and passion in the gods. '
o'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,
breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
carrying torches.
Ros. Both your majesties
and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
Oph. The king rises.
at least i am sure it may be so in denmark. [writes. ]
had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
Osr. How is't, laertes?
as thus, 'i know his father and his friends,
Enter king, queen, polonius, ophelia, rosencrantz, guildenstern, and lords.
abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
You told us of some suit. What is't, laertes?
and lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, laertes,
and leads the will to desperate undertakings
Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
your name be horatio, as i am let to know it is.
comes in again, seem to condole with her. The dead body is
and what so poor a man as hamlet is
admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
Now, out of this-
Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!
Pours the poison in his ears.
Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
your loneliness. - we are oft to blame in this,
[ghost beckons. ]
as you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
and his commission to employ those soldiers,
before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
Where should we have our thanks?
Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
The fair ophelia! - nymph, in thy orisons
about her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
but, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
Oph. My lord, i have remembrances of yours
you go not till i set you up a glass
yea, this solidity and compound mass,
answer, and think upon this business.
but keep a farm and carters.
favours?
Enter four or five players.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
but mere implorators of unholy suits,
might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
attendants].
and drive his purpose on to these delights.
Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
as he is very potent with such spirits,
your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
clouts.
If that his majesty would aught with us,
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
whose image even but now appear'd to us,
Enter king and polonius.
Enter polonius, voltemand, and cornelius.
Exeunt voltemand and cornelius.
Exeunt king and polonius].
Laertes, son to polonius.
King. Thou still hast been the father of good news.
[exit polonius. ]
This presence knows,
Look to't, i charge you. Come your ways.
King. I do not think't.
Pol. [aside] though this be madness, yet there is a method in't. -
Laer. A touch, a touch; i do confess't.
needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what
Pol. [aside] how say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet
But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
Flourish. [enter claudius, king of denmark, gertrude the queen, hamlet,
from fashion of himself. What think you on't?
Laer. I will do't!
as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to't.
Laer. A norman was't?
How dost thou, good lord? ' this might be my lord such-a-one, that
all welcome. We'll e'en to't like french falconers, fly at
as may dishonour him- take heed of that;
Oph. Do you doubt that?
(as i perceiv'd it, i must tell you that,
Pol. Hath there been such a time- i would fain know that-
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
carrying, i say, the stamp of one defect,
Flourish. Exeunt all but hamlet.
Enter hamlet.
from our achievements, though perform'd at height,
Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
I never gave you aught.
and with a sudden vigour it doth posset
doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
and whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
and vanish'd from our sight.
Rey. My lord, i did intend it.
Pol. Marry, well bethought!
are most select and generous, chief in that.
and for my soul, what can it do to that,
Ros. Truly, and i hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that
dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what
doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
nor any unproportion'd thought his act.
must give us pause. There's the respect
(as i perchance hereafter shall think meet
grating so harshly all his days of quiet
Oph. So please you, something touching the lord hamlet.
Mar. Lord hamlet!
King. Thy loving father, hamlet.
The queen carouses to thy fortune, hamlet.
as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet.
Queen. No, no! The drink, the drink! O my dear hamlet!
and scape detecting, i will pay the theft.
Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.
Was't hamlet wrong'd laertes? Never hamlet.
Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
and you yourself shall keep the key of it.
Ham. I will watch to-night.
of hamlet's transformation. So i call it,
but truly i do fear it.
Ham. It will not speak. Then will i follow it.
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
could force his soul so to his own conceit
King. We will try it.
your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
but answer made it none. Yet once methought
and draw you into madness? Think of it.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
Ham. How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it. -
If hamlet give the first or second hit,
Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.
And i beseech you instantly to visit
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
calumny. Get thee to a nunnery. Go, farewell. Or if thou wilt
Oph. Will he tell us what this show meant?
and i believe it is a fetch of warrant.
Pol. I will say so. Exit.
Laer. Farewell. Exit.
observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
against yourself. I know you are no truant.
a heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
and here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
but do not dull thy palm with entertainment
contagious blastments are most imminent.
and enterprises of great pith and moment
do i impart toward you. For your intent
Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go. Exeunt.
shall you my son. You have me, have you not
Hor. In what particular thought to work i know not;
epitaph is 'for o, for o, the hobby-horse is forgot! '
no reckoning made, but sent to my account
Laer. O, fear me not!
Ham. Very well. Follow that lord- and look you mock him not.
of all their conference. If she find him not,
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
Ham. Nay, that follows not.
Ghost. If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Ham. Nay, i know not.
Ham. To what base uses we may return, horatio! Why may not
Ros. No indeed are they not.
Guil. My lord, i cannot.
Guil. Believe me, i cannot.
Ham. Sir, i cannot.
Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- i cannot
Both. My lord, from head to foot.
But farewell it, for i will use no art.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
Ghost. I find thee apt;
such as it is; and for my own poor part,
Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
Ham. Ha, ha! Are you honest?
Enter ghost.
Ham. Alas, poor ghost!
dungeons, denmark being one o' th' worst.
When second husband let me be accurst!
so to seduce! - won to his shameful lust
most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
as it is common for the younger sort
Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, i should impart
Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
by laboursome petition, and at last
all saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
give me one poor request.
a couch for luxury and damned incest.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
Exit ghost.
Exit ghost.
and a most instant tetter bark'd about,
philosophy could find it out.
Ham. O jephthah, judge of israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, i am most
she married. O, most wicked speed, to post
Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
my too much changed son. - go, some of you,
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
by indirections find directions out.
seek for thy noble father in the dust.
I am dead, horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
And now, laertes, what's the news with you?
Ham. Beggar that i am, i am even poor in thanks; but i thank you;
and that in way of caution- i must tell you
but let me hear from you.
so, proceed you.
pol. Ophelia, walk you here. - gracious, so please you,
your sudden coming o'er to play with you.
King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you?
Both. We'll wait upon you.
good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you
for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again. - what do you
so grace and mercy at your most need help you,
Ham. Arm'd, say you?
Sailor. 'a shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for you,
with heraldry more dismal. Head to foot
Ham. How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,
The head is not more native to the heart,
and i am sick at heart.
Queen. More matter, with less art.
'as by lot, god wot, '
Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start
a chough; but, as i say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
Pol. My lord, i will use them according to their desert.
and with a look so piteous in purport
King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
as made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,
Exeunt polonius and players [except the first].
None wed the second but who killed the first.
Treachery! Seek it out.
That i distrust you. Yet, though i distrust,
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you
Hor. I beseech you.
Ham. I do beseech you.
King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Pol. What is't, ophelia, he hath said to you?
Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
Ham. I pray you.
Ros. [aside to guildenstern] what say you?
Scene iv.
Laer. Have at you now!
The story is extant, and written in very choice italian. You
my leave of you.
King. He made confession of you;
may do t' express his love and friending to you,
before my daughter told me), what might you,
Ham. Speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronounc'd it to you,
Ham. Sir, my good friend- i'll change that name with you.
Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
Pol. My lord, i have news to tell you.
have sent for you.
i'll visit you.
you, as your business and desires shall point you,
Ham. How purpos'd, sir, i pray you?
Queen. I shall obey you;
Scene v.
Scene v.
grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
Scene iv.
Other. But is this law?
King. Not that i know.
not of that dye which their investments show,
but i have that within which passeth show-
Laer. My lord, i'll hit him now.
Oph. My lord, i do not know,
and, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
lost by his father, with all bands of law,
Scene iv.
will not debate the question of this straw.
know a hawk from a handsaw.
Hor. 'twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
Ham. A dream itself is but a shadow.
King. [rises] my words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
it is but a shadow's shadow.
of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now
Ham. What hour now?
Ham. If she should break it now!
See you now-
and lose the name of action. - soft you now!
Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
Ham. What's the matter now?
Let's do't, i pray; and i this morning know
sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow
and ever three parts coward, - i do not know
Ham. Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow.
and do such bitter business as the day
that it went hand in hand even with the vow
and prais'd be rashness for it; let us know,
and then, you know,
His beard was as white as snow,
and it must follow, as the night the day,
I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
Imperious caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know;
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
and in the cup an union shall he throw
from the first corse till he that died to-day,
how does your honour for this many a day?
no jocund health that denmark drinks to-day
Laer. Say you so? Come on. Play.
that guilty creatures, sitting at a play,
Oph. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
King. What do you call the play?
Oph. You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.
Pol. Give o'er the play.
but if you hold it fit, after the play
Prepare to play.
Ham. Madam, how like you this play?
for they are actions that a man might play;
Laer. Come, my lord. They play.
Let hercules himself do what he may,
Oph. Madam, i wish it may.
or pardon'd being down? Then i'll look up;
find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
and, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
and wants not buzzers to infect his ear
the virtue of his will; but you must fear,
[they swear. ]
the guts of a beggar.
we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar
sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
for we will fetters put upon this fear,
how these things came about. So shall you hear
where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
and in his grave rain'd many a tear.
as peace should still her wheaten garland wear
disasters in the sun; and the moist star
ham. I beseech you remember.
the soldiers' music and the rites of war
that hurts by easing. But to the quick o' th' ulcer!
and what's untimely done. [so haply slander-]
and, but that great command o'ersways the order,
you know the wager?
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
that we can let our beard be shook with danger,
Bernardo, officer.
Enter a messenger.
that they are not a pipe for fortune's finger
shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
unto him. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her
to sing a requiem and such rest to her
make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
to give these mourning duties to your father;
requite him for your father.
give me my father!
most throughly for my father.
to draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
Clown. For none neither.
Enter king, queen, laertes, osric, and lords, with other
that hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
'tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
the apparition comes. I knew your father.
the frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together
folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
'tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
of my true mother.
but yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother
he that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;
and (would it were not so! ) you are my mother.
as kill a king, and marry with his brother.
of those effects for which i did the murther-
can serve my turn? 'forgive me my foul murther'?
Cornelius, courtier.
for 'tis the sport to have the enginer
that they do know my son, come you more nearer
or for some frontier?
they bore him barefac'd on the bier
Enter young osric, a courtier.
upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
plunge him into far more choler.
his kibe. - how long hast thou been a grave-maker?
the head and source of all your son's distemper.
whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
carpenter?
shipwright, or the carpenter?
on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-
skull, the king's jester.
Oph. Well, god dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.
winner and loser?
master's daughter.
that i must be their scourge and minister.
he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
to hear and see the matter.
What is the matter?
think how ill all's here about my heart. But it is no matter.
truly deliver.
while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
my fault is past. But, o, what form of prayer
osr. Sir?
whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
devis'd a new commission; wrote it fair.
not so wildly from my affair.
But on! Six barbary horses against six french swords, their
Clown. Mine, sir.
Clown. For no man, sir.
that thus he suffers for.
which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
[reads]'high and mighty, -you shall know i am set naked on your
[polonius hides behind the arras. ]
own grinning? Quite chap- fall'n? Now get you to my lady's
of mercy; but they knew what they did: i am to do a good turn for
rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was yorick's
it is our trick; nature her custom holds,
did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
this realm dismantled was
last king hamlet overcame fortinbras.
thin settled age his sables and his weeds,
unite comutual in most sacred bands.
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends. "
dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
that show of such an exercise may colour
Clown. A whoreson, mad fellow's it was. Whose do you think it was?
more than in words?
Then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es
but since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
nor thine on me! Dies.
caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties
and do not spread the compost on the weeds
there's a divinity that shapes our ends,
the very soul, and sweet religion makes
popp'd in between th' election and my hopes;
'tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
of mighty opposites.
to the ambassadors of england gives
out of his lunacies.
Laer. None but his enemies.
of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
where my abridgment comes.
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
so fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, laertes.
acts little of his will. Tell me, laertes,
King. Good laertes,
revenge should have no bounds. But, good laertes,
Queen. Calmly, good laertes.
osr. Of laertes?
change rapiers, [and hamlet wounds laertes].
should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
Enter two clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].
of mine own eyes.
though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
and batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes
blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
kingdom. To-morrow shall i beg leave to see your kingly eyes;
o, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
[clown digs and] sings.
Oph. (sings)
Oph. (sings)
Clown. (sings)
save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
king. If it be so, laertes
alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
after the thing it loves.
Oph. (sings)
osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
Clown. (sings)
O, this is counter, you false danish dogs!
great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his
well. - welcome, good friends. - o, my old friend? Why, thy face is
if you oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his
what majesty should be, what duty is,
to make oppression bitter, or ere this
Queen. To whom do you speak this?
of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
what warlike noise is this?
Queen. Alack, what noise is this?
laer. Why ask you this?
that i, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
to do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
with an attent ear, till i may deliver
if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
Capt. They are of norway, sir.
much approve me. Well, sir?
behind the arras hearing something stir,
next, your son gone, and he most violent author
and dupp'd the chamber door,
mother, good night. - indeed, this counsellor
to my revenge. But in my terms of honour
till by some elder masters of known honour
liquor.
is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our
Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, i came to't that day that our
All. Our duty to your honour.
Capt. The nephew to old norway, fortinbras.
upon whose influence neptune's empire stands
feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,
[the king puts laertes' hand into hamlet's. ]
whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
Clown. 'twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as
since love our hearts, and hymen did our hands,
and terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
lips that i have kiss'd i know not how oft. Where be your gibes
are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
we should do when we would; for this 'would' changes,
Clown. It must be se offendendo; it cannot be else. For here lies
were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your
convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your worm is your
ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as
to the inheritance of fortinbras,
for like the hectic in my blood he rages,
his fell to hamlet. Now, sir, young fortinbras,
the poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;
to norway, uncle of young fortinbras,
Come, gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
when sorrows come, they come not single spies.
that patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
when i to sulph'rous and tormenting flames
for in the fatness of these pursy times
but i will delve one yard below their mines
no trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words
if thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
and let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
as harbingers preceding still the fates
Enter king and laertes.
and when he's not himself does wrong laertes,
hamlet the dane. [leaps in after laertes.
to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves,
man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
together with remembrance of ourselves.
not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this
richer than that which four successive kings
lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'tis
the heartache, and the thousand natural shocks
with this affair along. For all, our thanks.
All may be well. He kneels.
conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
[laertes falls. ]
are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
and in this brainish apprehension kills
of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls
'the rugged pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
weigh what convenience both of time and means
till i have caught her once more in mine arms.
Clown. 'a was the first that ever bore arms.
a sister driven into desp'rate terms,
sith i have cause, and will, and strength, and means
as checking at his voyage, and that he means
themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
or i could make a prologue to my brains,
they have proclaim'd their malefactions;
[aside] to my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)
in ear and ear. O my dear gertrude, this,
how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.
it means, say you this:
to tell us this.
that not your trespass but my madness speaks.
to cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
as to peace-parted souls.
is the main motive of our preparations,
the insolence of office, and the spurns
larded with many several sorts of reasons,
the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps
[he] sleeps.
but age with his stealing steps
as from the body of contraction plucks
discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
in denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;
These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
the very faculties of eyes and ears.
who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
the light and careless livery that it wears
equivocation will undo us. By the lord, horatio, this three years
that was and is the question of these wars.
or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
souls, it touches us not. Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers
of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
come, i will give you way for these your letters,
larded all with sweet flowers;
Enter sailors.
our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
that i essentially am not in madness,
to both your honours.
thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
thirty years.
Enter the players with recorders.
Enter laertes with others.
Enter hamlet, rosencrantz, [guildenstern, ] and others.
till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,
the counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
enter a messenger with letters.
[scatters flowers. ]
he answers:
the portraiture of his. I'll court his favours.
and i the matter will reword; which madness
Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.
roughly awake, i here proclaim was madness.
and makes as healthful music. It is not madness
and that shall lend a kind of easiness
shall be the end of my business.
as one incapable of her own distress,
becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
and wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
English ambassadors.
she turns to favour and to prettiness.
shame and the odd hits.
and there i see such black and grained spots
All. Lights, lights, lights!
And even the like precurse of fierce events,
wherein they say you shine, your sun of parts
But, in the verity of extolment, i take him to be a soul of great
the leperous distilment; whose effect
[exeunt all but hamlet. ]
Capt. God b' wi' you, sir. [exit. ]
ham. I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not
'the rugged pyrrhus, like th' hyrcanian beast-'
why you proceeded not against these feats
of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
with such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
but i do prophesy th' election lights
attendants with foils and gauntlets.
and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.
free me so far in your most generous thoughts
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
Clown. Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
O heavens! Is't possible a young maid's wits
that no revenue hast but thy good spirits
did squeak and gibber in the roman streets;
even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
colours, and attendants.
Enter hamlet and guildenstern [with attendants].
tenants.
[exeunt attendants. ]
as there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
that, on the view and knowing of these contents,
between the pass and fell incensed points
question next, say 'a grave-maker. ' the houses he makes lasts
that spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
Both. We will haste us.
to give in evidence. What then? What rests?
be you content to lend your patience to us,
polonius.
was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
this unprevailing woe, and think of us
over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
even here between the chaste unsmirched brows
convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,
give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, i'll ha't.
to serve in such a difference. What devil was't
spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
for and a shrouding sheet;
counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet
Enter hamlet.
Enter hamlet.
excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
enter hamlet.
the death i gave him. So again, good night.
pays homage to us, - thou mayst not coldly set
Delay it not; i'll have him hence to-night.
to let you know of it.
But in our circumstance and course of thought,
bet against the danish. Why is this all impon'd, as you call it?
grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
the hearers to collection; they aim at it,
conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not
but that this folly douts it. Exit.
this grave shall have a living monument.
[exit attendant. ]
fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
to make it truster of your own report
th' associates tend, and everything is bent
divided from herself and her fair-judgment,
to give it due content.
thy knotted and combined locks to part,
that i have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
to ears of flesh and blood. List, list, o, list!
the ocean, overpeering of his list,
enter ghost.
discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;
the kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
for husband shalt thou-
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
further trade with us?
'tis not so; it begins with pyrrhus:
whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
when our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us
whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
king. How long hath she been thus?
it could not move thus.
reynaldo, servant to polonius.
Ber. Welcome, horatio. Welcome, good marcellus.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
the cock crows.
and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' sundays.
i ha't!
on't.
Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, i'll make an end on't!
What think you on't?
it hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
Clown. To't.
Young men will do't if they come to't
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
had witchcraft in't. He grew unto his seat,
laer. How now? What noise is that?
Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what
Ros. Believe what?
Queen. Ay me, what act,
o, methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet.
for such a guest is meet.
for such a guest is meet.
methought it was very sweet;
and blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
Mess. Letters, my lord, from hamlet:
Speak to her, hamlet.
Enter queen and polonius.
Enter polonius.
[lifts up the arras and sees polonius. ]
Enter polonius.
of blue olympus.
[makes a pass through the arras and] kills polonius.
that suck'd the honey of his music vows,
that has no relish of salvation in't-
[hamlet moves him to put on his hat. ]
even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
knave jowls it to the ground, as if 'twere cain's jawbone, that
Enter horatio and marcellus.
Enter lucianus.
Clown. E'en that.
to pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
that we find out the cause of this effect-
as hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
and sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
A villain kills my father; and for that,
when in one line two crafts directly meet.
The queen's closet.
[exeunt all but hamlet. ]
and put it in his pocket!
Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
No more, sweet hamlet!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight
Ber. Well, good night.
'tis now the very witching time of night,
whips out his rapier, cries 'a rat, a rat! '
now? Your gambols? Your songs? Your flashes of merriment that
is thought-sick at the act.
tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that
at gaming, swearing, or about some act
did slay this fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
that are but mutes or audience to this act,
as will not leave their tinct.
to lay our service freely at your feet,
by letters congruing to that effect,
'twere better not assay'd. Therefore this project
'he that thou knowest thine, hamlet. '
i should be greeted, if not from lord hamlet.
dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant hamlet
'hamlet. '
prais'd my lord such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might
sport and repose lock from me day and night,
that aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
ah, mine own lord, what have i seen to-night!
thou liv'st; report me and my cause aright
indeed would make one think there might be thought,
and, england, if my love thou hold'st at aught, -
then hamlet does it not, hamlet denies it.
so by his father lost; and this, i take it,
imagination trace the noble dust of alexander till he find it
time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
and will not wrong it.
so mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
he may approve our eyes and speak to it.
and am most sensibly in grief for it,
very liberal conceit.
which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
repair hither and say you are not fit.
we would not understand what was most fit,
to give them seals never, my soul, consent! Exit.
they are. To a nunnery, go. Exit.
my thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth! Exit.
howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun. Exit.
Words without thoughts never to heaven go. Exit.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days. Exit.
ladies. Good night, good night. Exit
we beg your hearing patiently. [exit. ]
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
it spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt
Enter horatio with an attendant.
and call it accident.
and they can well on horseback; but this gallant
i stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
and waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
queen, laertes, with lords attendant. ]
how in my words somever she be shent,
Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
is not to stir without great argument,
Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
spent.
upon his will i seal'd my hard consent.
this is but scratch'd withal. I'll touch my point
was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
Exeunt.
to him from whom you brought them. Exeunt.
there's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;
And shall i couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart!
sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
against the which a moiety competent
very day that young hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent
of thinking too precisely on th' event, -
makes mouths at the invisible event,
will be some danger; which for to prevent,
to you in satisfaction; but if not,
him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not
had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
when she saw pyrrhus make malicious sport
queen. O, confound the rest!
them to their trial-the bubbles are out,
should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt
Exeunt.
Exeunt
Exeunt.
where we shall find him most conveniently. Exeunt.
looking before and after, gave us not
it not?
Oph. I hope all will be well. We must be patient; but i cannot
or you deny me right. Go but apart,
lest with this piteous action you convert
and either [master] the devil, or throw him out
go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
that thou so many princes at a shot
a brother's murther! Pray can i not,
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
might it not?
this something-settled matter in his heart,
that she should lock herself from his resort,
may violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last
that you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
to hear of it. They are here about the court,
and when you are desirous to be blest,
whose motive in this case should stir me most
when churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
make you to ravel all this matter out,
the trumpet to the cannoneer without,
that inward breaks, and shows no cause without
them. Let the king have the letters i have sent, and repair thou
i'll rant as well as thou.
'thus didest thou. '
And of all christian souls, i pray god. God b' wi', you.
to let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you
where you may see the inmost part of you.
and he to england shall along with you.
to whom he more adheres. If it will please you
there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you
Queen. Alas, how is't with you,
hath sent me to you.
had it th' ability of life to thank you.
whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
the queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
but greatly to find quarrel in a straw
how to forget that learning; but, sir, now
how should i your true-love know
Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
a rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
and tell you what i know.
it did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
what i have said to you.
is strict in his arrest) o, i could tell you-
with all my love i do commend me to you;
this marvel to you.
Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines. There's rue for you,
King. Who shall stay you?
Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.
finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
Clown. 'tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to you.
king. Follow her close; give her good watch, i pray you.
(sings) white his shroud as the mountain snow-
Come. (they play. ) another hit. What say you?
See what a grace was seated on this brow;
does by their own insinuation grow.
hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
high on a stage be placed to the view;
But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now,
and i a maid at your window,
through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow
the bold winds speechless, and the orb below
therefore let's follow.
i be so able as now.
but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know;
to flaming youth let virtue be as wax
that roars so loud and thunders in the index?
translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox,
Ber. Say-
doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?
(sings) to-morrow is saint valentine's day,
bears such an emphasis? Whose phrase of sorrow
the cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
the changeling never known. Now, the next day
pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
that would not let me sleep. Methought i lay
the hart ungalled play;
the pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
laertes before you fall to play.
and will this brother's wager frankly play.
and still your fingers on your lips, i pray.
with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may;
look you, i'll go pray.
answer is i can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,
and hit the woundless air. - o, come away!
thus runs the world away.
Pol. Away, i do beseech you, both away
that, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
the stair, into the lobby.
and at the sound it shrunk in haste away
i' th' university, you say?
top of my bent. - i will come by-and-by.
to wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as i may say)
Clown. Very strangely, they say.
Ber. See, it stalks away!
the very cause of hamlet's lunacy.
for bearers of this greeting to old norway,
that you do bend your eye on vacancy,
here stooping to your clemency,
the players ready.
Ham. Well, god-a-mercy.
they bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway,
here in the lobby.
(sings) he is dead and gone, lady,
here was a gentleman of normandy.
Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
the natural gates and alleys of the body,
but not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
till our scale turn the beam. O rose of may!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
say-
Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- what was i about to say?
art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.
that you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
Osr. Nothing neither way.
King. O gertrude, come away!
King. Give me some light! Away!
Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!
If hamlet from himself be taken away,
Fortinbras, prince of norway.
Say, voltemand, what from our brother norway?
Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.
with turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
that he is open to incontinency.
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
make you ready.
O, say!
or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
pol. Marry, i will teach you! Think yourself a baby
Ham. Do the boys carry it away?
so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
thou know'st already.
Ham. How is it with you, lady?
One word more, good lady.
that, open'd, lies within our remedy.
pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
all my smooth body.
with which she followed my poor father's body
Guil. But we both obey,
waterfly?
yes, faith, heartily.
King. How do you, pretty lady?
For if the king like not the comedy,
King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
Ham. The body is with the king, but the king is not with the body.
Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
and makes each petty artire in this body
unto the voice and yielding of that body
they?
this warlike volley.
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.
on wholesome life usurp immediately.
worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly-
though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They
[laertes wounds hamlet; then] in scuffling, they
Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
humanity so abominably.
Ham. What, look'd he frowningly.
Ham. I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
Ham. Come for the third, laertes! You but dally.
tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
and for your rapier most especially,
for good polonius' death, and we have done but greenly
most free in his reply.
appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
Clown. Is she to be buried in christian burial when she wilfully
out of my weakness and my melancholy,
which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
you do not understand yourself so clearly
with this contagion, that, if i gall him slightly,
Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
Hor. Most constantly.
Pol. And the queen too, and that presently.
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
been struck so to the soul that presently
Pro. For us, and for our tragedy,
why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Ham. I embrace it freely,
Ham. Why?
Ham. Why,
Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
Ham. Why,
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
Pol. My lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.
Ham. No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my
feather. I have of late- but wherefore i know not- lost all my
pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
i will win for him if i can; if not, i will gain nothing but my
heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' court? For, by my
his madness is poor hamlet's enemy.
Ham. How strangely?
King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my
Clown. Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many
willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
directly seasons him his enemy.
Clown. Why, here in denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy
and hath abatements and delays as many
Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary
Guil. Happy in that we are not over-happy.
as england was his faithful tributary,
(hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
and there did seem in him a kind of joy
Whereon old norway, overcome with joy,
The violence of either grief or joy
have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
each opposite that blanks the face of joy
[sings] for bonny sweet robin is all my joy.
meet what i would have well, and it destroy,
their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!
When in your motion you are hot and dry-
glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry
than to entreaty.
Ham. Sir, a whole history.
well ratified by law and heraldry,
and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.
and our vain blows malicious mockery.
he likewise gives a frock or livery,
pol. At 'closes in the consequence'- ay, marry!
Ham. O god, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?
and who in want a hollow friend doth try,
Ham. If thou dost marry, i'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:
of man and country-
in neither aught, or in extremity.
passing through nature to eternity.
to youth and liberty.
tragedians of the city.
[sings] by gis and by saint charity,
that they may seem the taints of liberty,
thy natural magic and dire property
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
And these few precepts in thy memory
Yea, from the table of my memory
that does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
that are so fortified against our story,
a station like the herald mercury
there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,
with this regard their currents turn awry
to the next abstinence; the next more easy;
Is not this something more than fantasy?
Mar. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
of violent birth, but poor validity;
king. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety, -
and that in hamlet's hearing, for a quality
gone, far gone! And truly in my youth i suff'red much extremity
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
from me, whose love was of that dignity
for women's fear and love holds quantity,
if you desire to know the certainty
that blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
the lives of many. The cesse of majesty
that live and feed upon your majesty.
a thing to you from his majesty.
Ham. Sir, i will walk here in the hall. If it please his majesty,
Ham. Ecstasy?
This bodiless creation ecstasy
to his unmast'red importunity.
for goodness, growing to a plurisy,
and meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!
as in their birth, - wherein they are not guilty,
over the nasty sty!
to give th' assay of arms against your majesty.
Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
musty.
discourse to your beauty.
as needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
Cor. , volt. In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
and we did think it writ down in our duty
farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
did hamlet so envenom with his envy
march. [enter king, queen, polonius, ophelia, rosencrantz,
Enter rosencrantz.
Ham. Buzz, buzz!
Queen. Thanks, guildenstern and gentle rosencrantz.


    ------------------And you can read true Hamlet text------------------    


1604
the tragedy of hamlet, prince of denmark
by william shakespeare
dramatis personae
claudius, king of denmark.
Marcellus, officer.
Hamlet, son to the former, and nephew to the present king.
Polonius, lord chamberlain.
Horatio, friend to hamlet.
Laertes, son to polonius.
Voltemand, courtier.
Cornelius, courtier.
Rosencrantz, courtier.
Guildenstern, courtier.
Osric, courtier.
A gentleman, courtier.
A priest.
Marcellus, officer.
Bernardo, officer.
Francisco, a soldier
reynaldo, servant to polonius.
Players.
Two clowns, gravediggers.
Fortinbras, prince of norway.
A norwegian captain.
English ambassadors.
Getrude, queen of denmark, mother to hamlet.
Ophelia, daughter to polonius.
Ghost of hamlet's father.
Lords, ladies, officers, soldiers, sailors, messengers, attendants.
Scene. - elsinore.
Act i. Scene i.
Elsinore. A platform before the castle.
Enter two sentinels-[first, ] francisco, [who paces up and down
at his post; then] bernardo, [who approaches him].
Ber. Who's there. ?
Fran. Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.
Ber. Long live the king!
Fran. Bernardo?
Ber. He.
Fran. You come most carefully upon your hour.
Ber. 'tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, francisco.
Fran. For this relief much thanks. 'tis bitter cold,
and i am sick at heart.
Ber. Have you had quiet guard?
Fran. Not a mouse stirring.
Ber. Well, good night.
If you do meet horatio and marcellus,
the rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.
Enter horatio and marcellus.
Fran. I think i hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?
Hor. Friends to this ground.
Mar. And liegemen to the dane.
Fran. Give you good night.
Mar. O, farewell, honest soldier.
Who hath reliev'd you?
Fran. Bernardo hath my place.
Give you good night. Exit.
Mar. Holla, bernardo!
Ber. Say-
what, is horatio there ?
Hor. A piece of him.
Ber. Welcome, horatio. Welcome, good marcellus.
Mar. What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
Ber. I have seen nothing.
Mar. Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
and will not let belief take hold of him
touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.
Therefore i have entreated him along,
with us to watch the minutes of this night,
that, if again this apparition come,
he may approve our eyes and speak to it.
Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
Ber. Sit down awhile,
and let us once again assail your ears,
that are so fortified against our story,
what we two nights have seen.
Hor. Well, sit we down,
and let us hear bernardo speak of this.
Ber. Last night of all,
when yond same star that's westward from the pole
had made his course t' illume that part of heaven
where now it burns, marcellus and myself,
the bell then beating one-
enter ghost.
Mar. Peace! Break thee off! Look where it comes again!
Ber. In the same figure, like the king that's dead.
Mar. Thou art a scholar; speak to it, horatio.
Ber. Looks it not like the king? Mark it, horatio.
Hor. Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.
Ber. It would be spoke to.
Mar. Question it, horatio.
Hor. What art thou that usurp'st this time of night
together with that fair and warlike form
in which the majesty of buried denmark
did sometimes march? By heaven i charge thee speak!
Mar. It is offended.
Ber. See, it stalks away!
Hor. Stay! Speak, speak! I charge thee speak!
Exit ghost.
Mar. 'tis gone and will not answer.
Ber. How now, horatio? You tremble and look pale.
Is not this something more than fantasy?
What think you on't?
Hor. Before my god, i might not this believe
without the sensible and true avouch
of mine own eyes.
Mar. Is it not like the king?
Hor. As thou art to thyself.
Such was the very armour he had on
when he th' ambitious norway combated.
So frown'd he once when, in an angry parle,
he smote the sledded polacks on the ice.
'tis strange.
Mar. Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
with martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.
Hor. In what particular thought to work i know not;
but, in the gross and scope of my opinion,
this bodes some strange eruption to our state.
Mar. Good now, sit down, and tell me he that knows,
why this same strict and most observant watch
so nightly toils the subject of the land,
and why such daily cast of brazen cannon
and foreign mart for implements of war;
why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
does not divide the sunday from the week.
What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
doth make the night joint-labourer with the day?
Who is't that can inform me?
Hor. That can i.
At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
whose image even but now appear'd to us,
was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway,
thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
dar'd to the combat; in which our valiant hamlet
(for so this side of our known world esteem'd him)
did slay this fortinbras; who, by a seal'd compact,
well ratified by law and heraldry,
did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
which he stood seiz'd of, to the conqueror;
against the which a moiety competent
was gaged by our king; which had return'd
to the inheritance of fortinbras,
had he been vanquisher, as, by the same comart
and carriage of the article design'd,
his fell to hamlet. Now, sir, young fortinbras,
of unimproved mettle hot and full,
hath in the skirts of norway, here and there,
shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
for food and diet, to some enterprise
that hath a stomach in't; which is no other,
as it doth well appear unto our state,
but to recover of us, by strong hand
and terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
so by his father lost; and this, i take it,
is the main motive of our preparations,
the source of this our watch, and the chief head
of this post-haste and romage in the land.
Ber. I think it be no other but e'en so.
Well may it sort that this portentous figure
comes armed through our watch, so like the king
that was and is the question of these wars.
Hor. A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
In the most high and palmy state of rome,
a little ere the mightiest julius fell,
the graves stood tenantless, and the sheeted dead
did squeak and gibber in the roman streets;
as stars with trains of fire, and dews of blood,
disasters in the sun; and the moist star
upon whose influence neptune's empire stands
was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.
And even the like precurse of fierce events,
as harbingers preceding still the fates
and prologue to the omen coming on,
have heaven and earth together demonstrated
unto our climature and countrymen.
Enter ghost again.
But soft! Behold! Lo, where it comes again!
I'll cross it, though it blast me. - stay illusion!
Spreads his arms.
If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
speak to me.
If there be any good thing to be done,
that may to thee do ease, and, race to me,
speak to me.
If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
which happily foreknowing may avoid,
o, speak!
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
extorted treasure in the womb of earth
(for which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death),
the cock crows.
Speak of it! Stay, and speak! - stop it, marcellus!
Mar. Shall i strike at it with my partisan?
Hor. Do, if it will not stand.
Ber. 'tis here!
Hor. 'tis here!
Mar. 'tis gone!
Exit ghost.
We do it wrong, being so majestical,
to offer it the show of violence;
for it is as the air, invulnerable,
and our vain blows malicious mockery.
Ber. It was about to speak, when the cock crew.
Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing
upon a fearful summons. I have heard
the cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
awake the god of day; and at his warning,
whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
th' extravagant and erring spirit hies
to his confine; and of the truth herein
this present object made probation.
Mar. It faded on the crowing of the cock.
Some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes
wherein our saviour's birth is celebrated,
the bird of dawning singeth all night long;
and then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,
the nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,
no fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
so hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
Hor. So have i heard and do in part believe it.
But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.
Break we our watch up; and by my advice
let us impart what we have seen to-night
unto young hamlet; for, upon my life,
this spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
as needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
Let's do't, i pray; and i this morning know
where we shall find him most conveniently. Exeunt.
Scene ii.
Elsinore. A room of state in the castle.
Flourish. [enter claudius, king of denmark, gertrude the queen, hamlet,
polonius, laertes and his sister ophelia, [voltemand, cornelius, ]
lords attendant.
King. Though yet of hamlet our dear brother's death
the memory be green, and that it us befitted
to bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom
to be contracted in one brow of woe,
yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
that we with wisest sorrow think on him
together with remembrance of ourselves.
Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
th' imperial jointress to this warlike state,
have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,
with an auspicious, and a dropping eye,
with mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,
in equal scale weighing delight and dole,
taken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd
your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
with this affair along. For all, our thanks.
Now follows, that you know, young fortinbras,
holding a weak supposal of our worth,
or thinking by our late dear brother's death
our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
colleagued with this dream of his advantage,
he hath not fail'd to pester us with message
importing the surrender of those lands
lost by his father, with all bands of law,
to our most valiant brother. So much for him.
Now for ourself and for this time of meeting.
Thus much the business is: we have here writ
to norway, uncle of young fortinbras,
who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears
of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress
his further gait herein, in that the levies,
the lists, and full proportions are all made
out of his subject; and we here dispatch
you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand,
for bearers of this greeting to old norway,
giving to you no further personal power
to business with the king, more than the scope
of these dilated articles allow. [gives a paper. ]
farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
Cor. , volt. In that, and all things, will we show our duty.
King. We doubt it nothing. Heartily farewell.
Exeunt voltemand and cornelius.
And now, laertes, what's the news with you?
You told us of some suit. What is't, laertes?
You cannot speak of reason to the dane
and lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, laertes,
that shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
The head is not more native to the heart,
the hand more instrumental to the mouth,
than is the throne of denmark to thy father.
What wouldst thou have, laertes?
Laer. My dread lord,
your leave and favour to return to france;
from whence though willingly i came to denmark
to show my duty in your coronation,
yet now i must confess, that duty done,
my thoughts and wishes bend again toward france
and bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
King. Have you your father's leave? What says polonius?
Pol. He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
by laboursome petition, and at last
upon his will i seal'd my hard consent.
I do beseech you give him leave to go.
King. Take thy fair hour, laertes. Time be thine,
and thy best graces spend it at thy will!
But now, my cousin hamlet, and my son-
ham. [aside] a little more than kin, and less than kind!
King. How is it that the clouds still hang on you?
Ham. Not so, my lord. I am too much i' th' sun.
Queen. Good hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
and let thine eye look like a friend on denmark.
Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
seek for thy noble father in the dust.
Thou know'st 'tis common. All that lives must die,
passing through nature to eternity.
Ham. Ay, madam, it is common.
Queen. If it be,
why seems it so particular with thee?
Ham. Seems, madam, nay, it is. I know not 'seems. '
'tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
nor customary suits of solemn black,
nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
no, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
nor the dejected havior of the visage,
together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
'that can denote me truly. These indeed seem,
for they are actions that a man might play;
but i have that within which passeth show-
these but the trappings and the suits of woe.
King. 'tis sweet and commendable in your nature, hamlet,
to give these mourning duties to your father;
but you must know, your father lost a father;
that father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
in filial obligation for some term
to do obsequious sorrow. But to persever
in obstinate condolement is a course
of impious stubbornness. 'tis unmanly grief;
it shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
a heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
an understanding simple and unschool'd;
for what we know must be, and is as common
as any the most vulgar thing to sense,
why should we in our peevish opposition
take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
a fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
to reason most absurd, whose common theme
is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
from the first corse till he that died to-day,
'this must be so. ' we pray you throw to earth
this unprevailing woe, and think of us
as of a father; for let the world take note
you are the most immediate to our throne,
and with no less nobility of love
than that which dearest father bears his son
do i impart toward you. For your intent
in going back to school in wittenberg,
it is most retrograde to our desire;
and we beseech you, bend you to remain
here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
Queen. Let not thy mother lose her prayers, hamlet.
I pray thee stay with us, go not to wittenberg.
Ham. I shall in all my best obey you, madam.
King. Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply.
Be as ourself in denmark. Madam, come.
This gentle and unforc'd accord of hamlet
sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
no jocund health that denmark drinks to-day
but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
and the king's rouse the heaven shall bruit again,
respeaking earthly thunder. Come away.
Flourish. Exeunt all but hamlet.
Ham. O that this too too solid flesh would melt,
thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
Or that the everlasting had not fix'd
his canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O god! God!
How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable
seem to me all the uses of this world!
Fie on't! Ah, fie! 'tis an unweeded garden
that grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
possess it merely. That it should come to this!
But two months dead! Nay, not so much, not two.
So excellent a king, that was to this
hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
that he might not beteem the winds of heaven
visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
Must i remember? Why, she would hang on him
as if increase of appetite had grown
by what it fed on; and yet, within a month-
let me not think on't! Frailty, thy name is woman! -
a little month, or ere those shoes were old
with which she followed my poor father's body
like niobe, all tears- why she, even she
(o god! A beast that wants discourse of reason
would have mourn'd longer) married with my uncle;
my father's brother, but no more like my father
than i to hercules. Within a month,
ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
she married. O, most wicked speed, to post
with such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
But break my heart, for i must hold my tongue!
Enter horatio, marcellus, and bernardo.
Hor. Hail to your lordship!
Ham. I am glad to see you well.
Horatio! - or i do forget myself.
Hor. The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
Ham. Sir, my good friend- i'll change that name with you.
And what make you from wittenberg, horatio?
Marcellus?
Mar. My good lord!
Ham. I am very glad to see you. - [to bernardo] good even, sir. -
but what, in faith, make you from wittenberg?
Hor. A truant disposition, good my lord.
Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so,
nor shall you do my ear that violence
to make it truster of your own report
against yourself. I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in elsinore?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
Hor. My lord, i came to see your father's funeral.
Ham. I prithee do not mock me, fellow student.
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.
Hor. Indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Ham. Thrift, thrift, horatio! The funeral bak'd meats
did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
Would i had met my dearest foe in heaven
or ever i had seen that day, horatio!
My father- methinks i see my father.
Hor. O, where, my lord?
Ham. In my mind's eye, horatio.
Hor. I saw him once. He was a goodly king.
Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all.
I shall not look upon his like again.
Hor. My lord, i think i saw him yesternight.
Ham. Saw? Who?
Hor. My lord, the king your father.
Ham. The king my father?
Hor. Season your admiration for a while
with an attent ear, till i may deliver
upon the witness of these gentlemen,
this marvel to you.
Ham. For god's love let me hear!
Hor. Two nights together had these gentlemen
(marcellus and bernardo) on their watch
in the dead vast and middle of the night
been thus encount'red. A figure like your father,
armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
appears before them and with solemn march
goes slow and stately by them. Thrice he walk'd
by their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
within his truncheon's length; whilst they distill'd
almost to jelly with the act of fear,
stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
in dreadful secrecy impart they did,
and i with them the third night kept the watch;
where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
form of the thing, each word made true and good,
the apparition comes. I knew your father.
These hands are not more like.
Ham. But where was this?
Mar. My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.
Ham. Did you not speak to it?
Hor. My lord, i did;
but answer made it none. Yet once methought
it lifted up it head and did address
itself to motion, like as it would speak;
but even then the morning cock crew loud,
and at the sound it shrunk in haste away
and vanish'd from our sight.
Ham. 'tis very strange.
Hor. As i do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;
and we did think it writ down in our duty
to let you know of it.
Ham. Indeed, indeed, sirs. But this troubles me.
Hold you the watch to-night?
Both [mar. And ber. ] we do, my lord.
Ham. Arm'd, say you?
Both. Arm'd, my lord.
Ham. From top to toe?
Both. My lord, from head to foot.
Ham. Then saw you not his face?
Hor. O, yes, my lord! He wore his beaver up.
Ham. What, look'd he frowningly.
Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Ham. Pale or red?
Hor. Nay, very pale.
Ham. And fix'd his eyes upon you?
Hor. Most constantly.
Ham. I would i had been there.
Hor. It would have much amaz'd you.
Ham. Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?
Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
Both. Longer, longer.
Hor. Not when i saw't.
Ham. His beard was grizzled- no?
Hor. It was, as i have seen it in his life,
a sable silver'd.
Ham. I will watch to-night.
Perchance 'twill walk again.
Hor. I warr'nt it will.
Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
i'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
and bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
if you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
let it be tenable in your silence still;
and whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
give it an understanding but no tongue.
I will requite your loves. So, fare you well.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
i'll visit you.
All. Our duty to your honour.
Ham. Your loves, as mine to you. Farewell.
Exeunt [all but hamlet].
My father's spirit- in arms? All is not well.
I doubt some foul play. Would the night were come!
Till then sit still, my soul. Foul deeds will rise,
though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
Exit.
Scene iii.
Elsinore. A room in the house of polonius.
Enter laertes and ophelia.
Laer. My necessaries are embark'd. Farewell.
And, sister, as the winds give benefit
and convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
but let me hear from you.
Oph. Do you doubt that?
Laer. For hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,
hold it a fashion, and a toy in blood;
a violet in the youth of primy nature,
forward, not permanent- sweet, not lasting;
the perfume and suppliance of a minute;
no more.
Oph. No more but so?
Laer. Think it no more.
For nature crescent does not grow alone
in thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,
the inward service of the mind and soul
grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
and now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
the virtue of his will; but you must fear,
his greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
for he himself is subject to his birth.
He may not, as unvalued persons do,
carve for himself, for on his choice depends
the safety and health of this whole state,
and therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd
unto the voice and yielding of that body
whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
it fits your wisdom so far to believe it
as he in his particular act and place
may give his saying deed; which is no further
than the main voice of denmark goes withal.
Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain
if with too credent ear you list his songs,
or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
to his unmast'red importunity.
Fear it, ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
and keep you in the rear of your affection,
out of the shot and danger of desire.
The chariest maid is prodigal enough
if she unmask her beauty to the moon.
Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes.
The canker galls the infants of the spring
too oft before their buttons be disclos'd,
and in the morn and liquid dew of youth
contagious blastments are most imminent.
Be wary then; best safety lies in fear.
Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
Oph. I shall th' effect of this good lesson keep
as watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
do not as some ungracious pastors do,
show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,
whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
himself the primrose path of dalliance treads
and recks not his own rede.
Laer. O, fear me not!
Enter polonius.
I stay too long. But here my father comes.
A double blessing is a double grace;
occasion smiles upon a second leave.
Pol. Yet here, laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame!
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
and you are stay'd for. There- my blessing with thee!
And these few precepts in thy memory
look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
nor any unproportion'd thought his act.
Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar:
those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;
but do not dull thy palm with entertainment
of each new-hatch'd, unfledg'd comrade. Beware
of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,
bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice;
take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
but not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
for the apparel oft proclaims the man,
and they in france of the best rank and station
are most select and generous, chief in that.
Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
for loan oft loses both itself and friend,
and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
This above all- to thine own self be true,
and it must follow, as the night the day,
thou canst not then be false to any man.
Farewell. My blessing season this in thee!
Laer. Most humbly do i take my leave, my lord.
Pol. The time invites you. Go, your servants tend.
Laer. Farewell, ophelia, and remember well
what i have said to you.
Oph. 'tis in my memory lock'd,
and you yourself shall keep the key of it.
Laer. Farewell. Exit.
Pol. What is't, ophelia, he hath said to you?
Oph. So please you, something touching the lord hamlet.
Pol. Marry, well bethought!
'tis told me he hath very oft of late
given private time to you, and you yourself
have of your audience been most free and bounteous.
If it be so- as so 'tis put on me,
and that in way of caution- i must tell you
you do not understand yourself so clearly
as it behooves my daughter and your honour.
What is between you? Give me up the truth.
Oph. He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
of his affection to me.
Pol. Affection? Pooh! You speak like a green girl,
unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?
Oph. I do not know, my lord, what i should think,
pol. Marry, i will teach you! Think yourself a baby
that you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,
or (not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
running it thus) you'll tender me a fool.
Oph. My lord, he hath importun'd me with love
in honourable fashion.
Pol. Ay, fashion you may call it. Go to, go to!
Oph. And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
with almost all the holy vows of heaven.
Pol. Ay, springes to catch woodcocks! I do know,
when the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
lends the tongue vows. These blazes, daughter,
giving more light than heat, extinct in both
even in their promise, as it is a-making,
you must not take for fire. From this time
be something scanter of your maiden presence.
Set your entreatments at a higher rate
than a command to parley. For lord hamlet,
believe so much in him, that he is young,
and with a larger tether may he walk
than may be given you. In few, ophelia,
do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
not of that dye which their investments show,
but mere implorators of unholy suits,
breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
the better to beguile. This is for all:
i would not, in plain terms, from this time forth
have you so slander any moment leisure
as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet.
Look to't, i charge you. Come your ways.
Oph. I shall obey, my lord.
Exeunt.
Scene iv.
Elsinore. The platform before the castle.
Enter hamlet, horatio, and marcellus.
Ham. The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
Hor. It is a nipping and an eager air.
Ham. What hour now?
Hor. I think it lacks of twelve.
Mar. No, it is struck.
Hor. Indeed? I heard it not. It then draws near the season
wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
A flourish of trumpets, and two pieces go off.
What does this mean, my lord?
Ham. The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels,
and, as he drains his draughts of rhenish down,
the kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out
the triumph of his pledge.
Hor. Is it a custom?
Ham. Ay, marry, is't;
but to my mind, though i am native here
and to the manner born, it is a custom
more honour'd in the breach than the observance.
This heavy-headed revel east and west
makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations;
they clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase
soil our addition; and indeed it takes
from our achievements, though perform'd at height,
the pith and marrow of our attribute.
So oft it chances in particular men
that, for some vicious mole of nature in them,
as in their birth, - wherein they are not guilty,
since nature cannot choose his origin, -
by the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
or by some habit that too much o'erleavens
the form of plausive manners, that these men
carrying, i say, the stamp of one defect,
being nature's livery, or fortune's star,
their virtues else- be they as pure as grace,
as infinite as man may undergo-
shall in the general censure take corruption
from that particular fault. The dram of e'il
doth all the noble substance often dout to his own scandal.
Enter ghost.
Hor. Look, my lord, it comes!
Ham. Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
be thy intents wicked or charitable,
thou com'st in such a questionable shape
that i will speak to thee. I'll call thee hamlet,
king, father, royal dane. O, answer me?
Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell
why thy canoniz'd bones, hearsed in death,
have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre
wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws
to cast thee up again. What may this mean
that thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,
revisits thus the glimpses of the moon,
making night hideous, and we fools of nature
so horridly to shake our disposition
with thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?
Ghost beckons hamlet.
Hor. It beckons you to go away with it,
as if it some impartment did desire
to you alone.
Mar. Look with what courteous action
it waves you to a more removed ground.
But do not go with it!
Hor. No, by no means!
Ham. It will not speak. Then will i follow it.
Hor. Do not, my lord!
Ham. Why, what should be the fear?
I do not set my life at a pin's fee;
and for my soul, what can it do to that,
being a thing immortal as itself?
It waves me forth again. I'll follow it.
Hor. What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
that beetles o'er his base into the sea,
and there assume some other, horrible form
which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
and draw you into madness? Think of it.
The very place puts toys of desperation,
without more motive, into every brain
that looks so many fadoms to the sea
and hears it roar beneath.
Ham. It waves me still.
Go on. I'll follow thee.
Mar. You shall not go, my lord.
Ham. Hold off your hands!
Hor. Be rul'd. You shall not go.
Ham. My fate cries out
and makes each petty artire in this body
as hardy as the nemean lion's nerve.
[ghost beckons. ]
still am i call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
By heaven, i'll make a ghost of him that lets me! -
i say, away! - go on. I'll follow thee.
Exeunt ghost and hamlet.
Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination.
Mar. Let's follow. 'tis not fit thus to obey him.
Hor. Have after. To what issue wail this come?
Mar. Something is rotten in the state of denmark.
Hor. Heaven will direct it.
Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
Exeunt.
Scene v.
Elsinore. The castle. Another part of the fortifications.
Enter ghost and hamlet.
Ham. Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak! I'll go no further.
Ghost. Mark me.
Ham. I will.
Ghost. My hour is almost come,
when i to sulph'rous and tormenting flames
must render up myself.
Ham. Alas, poor ghost!
Ghost. Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
to what i shall unfold.
Ham. Speak. I am bound to hear.
Ghost. So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.
Ham. What?
Ghost. I am thy father's spirit,
doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
and for the day confin'd to fast in fires,
till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
are burnt and purg'd away. But that i am forbid
to tell the secrets of my prison house,
i could a tale unfold whose lightest word
would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
thy knotted and combined locks to part,
and each particular hair to stand an end
like quills upon the fretful porpentine.
But this eternal blazon must not be
to ears of flesh and blood. List, list, o, list!
If thou didst ever thy dear father love-
ham. O god!
Ghost. Revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
Ham. Murther?
Ghost. Murther most foul, as in the best it is;
but this most foul, strange, and unnatural.
Ham. Haste me to know't, that i, with wings as swift
as meditation or the thoughts of love,
may sweep to my revenge.
Ghost. I find thee apt;
and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
that rots itself in ease on lethe wharf,
wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, hamlet, hear.
'tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
a serpent stung me. So the whole ear of denmark
is by a forged process of my death
rankly abus'd. But know, thou noble youth,
the serpent that did sting thy father's life
now wears his crown.
Ham. O my prophetic soul!
My uncle?
Ghost. Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
with witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts-
o wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
so to seduce! - won to his shameful lust
the will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.
O hamlet, what a falling-off was there,
from me, whose love was of that dignity
that it went hand in hand even with the vow
i made to her in marriage, and to decline
upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
to those of mine!
But virtue, as it never will be mov'd,
though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
so lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
will sate itself in a celestial bed
and prey on garbage.
But soft! Methinks i scent the morning air.
Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
my custom always of the afternoon,
upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
with juice of cursed hebona in a vial,
and in the porches of my ears did pour
the leperous distilment; whose effect
holds such an enmity with blood of man
that swift as quicksilverr it courses through
the natural gates and alleys of the body,
and with a sudden vigour it doth posset
and curd, like eager droppings into milk,
the thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;
and a most instant tetter bark'd about,
most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust
all my smooth body.
Thus was i, sleeping, by a brother's hand
of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd;
cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
unhous'led, disappointed, unanel'd,
no reckoning made, but sent to my account
with all my imperfections on my head.
Ham. O, horrible! O, horrible! Most horrible!
Ghost. If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not.
Let not the royal bed of denmark be
a couch for luxury and damned incest.
But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
against thy mother aught. Leave her to heaven,
and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge
to prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once.
The glowworm shows the matin to be near
and gins to pale his uneffectual fire.
Adieu, adieu, adieu! Remember me. Exit.
Ham. O all you host of heaven! O earth! What else?
And shall i couple hell? Hold, hold, my heart!
And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
but bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?
Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
in this distracted globe. Remember thee?
Yea, from the table of my memory
i'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
all saws of books, all forms, all pressures past
that youth and observation copied there,
and thy commandment all alone shall live
within the book and volume of my brain,
unmix'd with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!
O most pernicious woman!
O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
My tables! Meet it is i set it down
that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
at least i am sure it may be so in denmark. [writes. ]
so, uncle, there you are. Now to my word:
it is 'adieu, adieu! Remember me. '
i have sworn't.
Hor. (within) my lord, my lord!
Enter horatio and marcellus.
Mar. Lord hamlet!
Hor. Heaven secure him!
Ham. So be it!
Mar. Illo, ho, ho, my lord!
Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.
Mar. How is't, my noble lord?
Hor. What news, my lord?
Mar. O, wonderful!
Hor. Good my lord, tell it.
Ham. No, you will reveal it.
Hor. Not i, my lord, by heaven!
Mar. Nor i, my lord.
Ham. How say you then? Would heart of man once think it?
But you'll be secret?
Both. Ay, by heaven, my lord.
Ham. There's neer a villain dwelling in all denmark
but he's an arrant knave.
Hor. There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
to tell us this.
Ham. Why, right! You are in the right!
And so, without more circumstance at all,
i hold it fit that we shake hands and part;
you, as your business and desires shall point you,
for every man hath business and desire,
such as it is; and for my own poor part,
look you, i'll go pray.
Hor. These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
Ham. I am sorry they offend you, heartily;
yes, faith, heartily.
Hor. There's no offence, my lord.
Ham. Yes, by saint patrick, but there is, horatio,
and much offence too. Touching this vision here,
it is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.
For your desire to know what is between us,
o'ermaster't as you may. And now, good friends,
as you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,
give me one poor request.
Hor. What is't, my lord? We will.
Ham. Never make known what you have seen to-night.
Both. My lord, we will not.
Ham. Nay, but swear't.
Hor. In faith,
my lord, not i.
Mar. Nor i, my lord- in faith.
Ham. Upon my sword.
Mar. We have sworn, my lord, already.
Ham. Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
Ghost cries under the stage.
Ghost. Swear.
Ham. Aha boy, say'st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?
Come on! You hear this fellow in the cellarage.
Consent to swear.
Hor. Propose the oath, my lord.
Ham. Never to speak of this that you have seen.
Swear by my sword.
Ghost. [beneath] swear.
Ham. Hic et ubique? Then we'll shift our ground.
Come hither, gentlemen,
and lay your hands again upon my sword.
Never to speak of this that you have heard:
swear by my sword.
Ghost. [beneath] swear by his sword.
Ham. Well said, old mole! Canst work i' th' earth so fast?
A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends. "
hor. O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
Ham. And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
There are more things in heaven and earth, horatio,
than are dreamt of in your philosophy.
But come!
Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
how strange or odd soe'er i bear myself
(as i perchance hereafter shall think meet
to put an antic disposition on),
that you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
with arms encumb'red thus, or this head-shake,
or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
as 'well, well, we know, ' or 'we could, an if we would, '
or 'if we list to speak, ' or 'there be, an if they might, '
or such ambiguous giving out, to note
that you know aught of me- this is not to do,
so grace and mercy at your most need help you,
swear.
Ghost. [beneath] swear.
[they swear. ]
ham. Rest, rest, perturbed spirit! So, gentlemen,
with all my love i do commend me to you;
and what so poor a man as hamlet is
may do t' express his love and friending to you,
god willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;
and still your fingers on your lips, i pray.
The time is out of joint. O cursed spite
that ever i was born to set it right!
Nay, come, let's go together.
Exeunt.
Act ii. Scene i.
Elsinore. A room in the house of polonius.
Enter polonius and reynaldo.
Pol. Give him this money and these notes, reynaldo.
Rey. I will, my lord.
Pol. You shall do marvell's wisely, good reynaldo,
before you visit him, to make inquire
of his behaviour.
Rey. My lord, i did intend it.
Pol. Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,
enquire me first what danskers are in paris;
and how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
what company, at what expense; and finding
by this encompassment and drift of question
that they do know my son, come you more nearer
than your particular demands will touch it.
Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
as thus, 'i know his father and his friends,
and in part him. ' do you mark this, reynaldo?
Rey. Ay, very well, my lord.
Pol. 'and in part him, but, ' you may say, 'not well.
But if't be he i mean, he's very wild
addicted so and so'; and there put on him
what forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
as may dishonour him- take heed of that;
but, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
as are companions noted and most known
to youth and liberty.
Rey. As gaming, my lord.
Pol. Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
drabbing. You may go so far.
Rey. My lord, that would dishonour him.
Pol. Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge.
You must not put another scandal on him,
that he is open to incontinency.
That's not my meaning. But breathe his faults so quaintly
that they may seem the taints of liberty,
the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
a savageness in unreclaimed blood,
of general assault.
Rey. But, my good lord-
pol. Wherefore should you do this?
Rey. Ay, my lord,
i would know that.
Pol. Marry, sir, here's my drift,
and i believe it is a fetch of warrant.
You laying these slight sullies on my son
as 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working,
mark you,
your party in converse, him you would sound,
having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
the youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd
he closes with you in this consequence:
'good sir, ' or so, or 'friend, ' or 'gentleman'-
according to the phrase or the addition
of man and country-
rey. Very good, my lord.
Pol. And then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- what was i about to say?
By the mass, i was about to say something! Where did i leave?
Rey. At 'closes in the consequence, ' at 'friend or so, ' and
gentleman. '
pol. At 'closes in the consequence'- ay, marry!
He closes thus: 'i know the gentleman.
I saw him yesterday, or t'other day,
or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say,
there was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
there falling out at tennis'; or perchance,
'i saw him enter such a house of sale, '
videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
See you now-
your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;
and thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
with windlasses and with assays of bias,
by indirections find directions out.
So, by my former lecture and advice,
shall you my son. You have me, have you not
rey. My lord, i have.
Pol. God b' wi' ye, fare ye well!
Rey. Good my lord! [going. ]
pol. Observe his inclination in yourself.
Rey. I shall, my lord.
Pol. And let him ply his music.
Rey. Well, my lord.
Pol. Farewell!
Exit reynaldo.
Enter ophelia.
How now, ophelia? What's the matter?
Oph. O my lord, my lord, i have been so affrighted!
Pol. With what, i' th' name of god i
oph. My lord, as i was sewing in my closet,
lord hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac'd,
no hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,
ungart'red, and down-gyved to his ankle;
pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
and with a look so piteous in purport
as if he had been loosed out of hell
to speak of horrors- he comes before me.
Pol. Mad for thy love?
Oph. My lord, i do not know,
but truly i do fear it.
Pol. What said he?
Oph. He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
then goes he to the length of all his arm,
and, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
he falls to such perusal of my face
as he would draw it. Long stay'd he so.
At last, a little shaking of mine arm,
and thrice his head thus waving up and down,
he rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound
as it did seem to shatter all his bulk
and end his being. That done, he lets me go,
and with his head over his shoulder turn'd
he seem'd to find his way without his eyes,
for out o' doors he went without their help
and to the last bended their light on me.
Pol. Come, go with me. I will go seek the king.
This is the very ecstasy of love,
whose violent property fordoes itself
and leads the will to desperate undertakings
as oft as any passion under heaven
that does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
What, have you given him any hard words of late?
Oph. No, my good lord; but, as you did command,
i did repel his letters and denied
his access to me.
Pol. That hath made him mad.
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
i had not quoted him. I fear'd he did but trifle
and meant to wrack thee; but beshrew my jealousy!
By heaven, it is as proper to our age
to cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
as it is common for the younger sort
to lack discretion. Come, go we to the king.
This must be known; which, being kept close, might move
more grief to hide than hate to utter love.
Come.
Exeunt.
Scene ii.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Flourish. [enter king and queen, rosencrantz and guildenstern, cum aliis.
King. Welcome, dear rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Moreover that we much did long to see you,
the need we have to use you did provoke
our hasty sending. Something have you heard
of hamlet's transformation. So i call it,
sith nor th' exterior nor the inward man
resembles that it was. What it should be,
more than his father's death, that thus hath put him
so much from th' understanding of himself,
i cannot dream of. I entreat you both
that, being of so young clays brought up with him,
and since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour,
that you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
some little time; so by your companies
to draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
so much as from occasion you may glean,
whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus
that, open'd, lies within our remedy.
Queen. Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
and sure i am two men there are not living
to whom he more adheres. If it will please you
to show us so much gentry and good will
as to expend your time with us awhile
for the supply and profit of our hope,
your visitation shall receive such thanks
as fits a king's remembrance.
Ros. Both your majesties
might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
put your dread pleasures more into command
than to entreaty.
Guil. But we both obey,
and here give up ourselves, in the full bent,
to lay our service freely at your feet,
to be commanded.
King. Thanks, rosencrantz and gentle guildenstern.
Queen. Thanks, guildenstern and gentle rosencrantz.
And i beseech you instantly to visit
my too much changed son. - go, some of you,
and bring these gentlemen where hamlet is.
Guil. Heavens make our presence and our practices
pleasant and helpful to him!
Queen. Ay, amen!
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern, [with some
attendants].
Enter polonius.
Pol. Th' ambassadors from norway, my good lord,
are joyfully return'd.
King. Thou still hast been the father of good news.
Pol. Have i, my lord? Assure you, my good liege,
i hold my duty as i hold my soul,
both to my god and to my gracious king;
and i do think- or else this brain of mine
hunts not the trail of policy so sure
as it hath us'd to do- that i have found
the very cause of hamlet's lunacy.
King. O, speak of that! That do i long to hear.
Pol. Give first admittance to th' ambassadors.
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
King. Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
[exit polonius. ]
he tells me, my dear gertrude, he hath found
the head and source of all your son's distemper.
Queen. I doubt it is no other but the main,
his father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
King. Well, we shall sift him.
Enter polonius, voltemand, and cornelius.
Welcome, my good friends.
Say, voltemand, what from our brother norway?
Volt. Most fair return of greetings and desires.
Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
his nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
to be a preparation 'gainst the polack,
but better look'd into, he truly found
it was against your highness; whereat griev'd,
that so his sickness, age, and impotence
was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
on fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,
receives rebuke from norway, and, in fine,
makes vow before his uncle never more
to give th' assay of arms against your majesty.
Whereon old norway, overcome with joy,
gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee
and his commission to employ those soldiers,
so levied as before, against the polack;
with an entreaty, herein further shown,
[gives a paper. ]
that it might please you to give quiet pass
through your dominions for this enterprise,
on such regards of safety and allowance
as therein are set down.
King. It likes us well;
and at our more consider'd time we'll read,
answer, and think upon this business.
Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.
Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together.
Most welcome home! Exeunt ambassadors.
Pol. This business is well ended.
My liege, and madam, to expostulate
what majesty should be, what duty is,
why day is day, night is night, and time is time.
Were nothing but to waste night, day, and time.
Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
i will be brief. Your noble son is mad.
Mad call i it; for, to define true madness,
what is't but to be nothing else but mad?
But let that go.
Queen. More matter, with less art.
Pol. Madam, i swear i use no art at all.
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
and pity 'tis 'tis true. A foolish figure!
But farewell it, for i will use no art.
Mad let us grant him then. And now remains
that we find out the cause of this effect-
or rather say, the cause of this defect,
for this effect defective comes by cause.
Thus it remains, and the remainder thus.
Perpend.
I have a daughter (have while she is mine),
who in her duty and obedience, mark,
hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.
[reads] the letter.
'to the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified
ophelia, '-
that's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is a vile
phrase.
But you shall hear. Thus:
[reads. ]
'in her excellent white bosom, these, &c. '
queen. Came this from hamlet to her?
Pol. Good madam, stay awhile. I will be faithful. [reads. ]
'doubt thou the stars are fire;
doubt that the sun doth move;
doubt truth to be a liar;
but never doubt i love.
'o dear ophelia, i am ill at these numbers; i have not art to
reckon my groans; but that i love thee best, o most best, believe
it. Adieu.
'thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,
hamlet. '
this, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me;
and more above, hath his solicitings,
as they fell out by time, by means, and place,
all given to mine ear.
King. But how hath she
receiv'd his love?
Pol. What do you think of me?
King. As of a man faithful and honourable.
Pol. I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
when i had seen this hot love on the wing
(as i perceiv'd it, i must tell you that,
before my daughter told me), what might you,
or my dear majesty your queen here, think,
if i had play'd the desk or table book,
or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
or look'd upon this love with idle sight?
What might you think? No, i went round to work
and my young mistress thus i did bespeak:
'lord hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.
This must not be. ' and then i prescripts gave her,
that she should lock herself from his resort,
admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,
and he, repulsed, a short tale to make,
fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
into the madness wherein now he raves,
and all we mourn for.
King. Do you think 'tis this?
Queen. It may be, very like.
Pol. Hath there been such a time- i would fain know that-
that i have positively said ''tis so, '
when it prov'd otherwise. ?
King. Not that i know.
Pol. [points to his head and shoulder] take this from this, if this
be otherwise.
If circumstances lead me, i will find
where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
within the centre.
King. How may we try it further?
Pol. You know sometimes he walks four hours together
here in the lobby.
Queen. So he does indeed.
Pol. At such a time i'll loose my daughter to him.
Be you and i behind an arras then.
Mark the encounter. If he love her not,
and he not from his reason fall'n thereon
let me be no assistant for a state,
but keep a farm and carters.
King. We will try it.
Enter hamlet, reading on a book.
Queen. But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
Pol. Away, i do beseech you, both away
i'll board him presently. O, give me leave.
Exeunt king and queen, [with attendants].
How does my good lord hamlet?
Ham. Well, god-a-mercy.
Pol. Do you know me, my lord?
Ham. Excellent well. You are a fishmonger.
Pol. Not i, my lord.
Ham. Then i would you were so honest a man.
Pol. Honest, my lord?
Ham. Ay, sir. To be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man
pick'd out of ten thousand.
Pol. That's very true, my lord.
Ham. For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a god
kissing carrion- have you a daughter?
Pol. I have, my lord.
Ham. Let her not walk i' th' sun. Conception is a blessing, but not
as your daughter may conceive. Friend, look to't.
Pol. [aside] how say you by that? Still harping on my daughter. Yet
he knew me not at first. He said i was a fishmonger. He is far
gone, far gone! And truly in my youth i suff'red much extremity
for love- very near this. I'll speak to him again. - what do you
read, my lord?
Ham. Words, words, words.
Pol. What is the matter, my lord?
Ham. Between who?
Pol. I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
Ham. Slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men
have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes
purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a
plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams. All which,
sir, though i most powerfully and potently believe, yet i hold it
not honesty to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir,
should be old as i am if, like a crab, you could go backward.
Pol. [aside] though this be madness, yet there is a method in't. -
will you walk out of the air, my lord?
Ham. Into my grave?
Pol. Indeed, that is out o' th' air. [aside] how pregnant sometimes
his replies are! A happiness that often madness hits on, which
reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. I
will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between
him and my daughter. - my honourable lord, i will most humbly take
my leave of you.
Ham. You cannot, sir, take from me anything that i will more
willingly part withal- except my life, except my life, except my
life,
enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Pol. Fare you well, my lord.
Ham. These tedious old fools!
Pol. You go to seek the lord hamlet. There he is.
Ros. [to polonius] god save you, sir!
Exit [polonius].
Guil. My honour'd lord!
Ros. My most dear lord!
Ham. My excellent good friends! How dost thou, guildenstern? Ah,
rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?
Ros. As the indifferent children of the earth.
Guil. Happy in that we are not over-happy.
On fortune's cap we are not the very button.
Ham. Nor the soles of her shoe?
Ros. Neither, my lord.
Ham. Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her
favours?
Guil. Faith, her privates we.
Ham. In the secret parts of fortune? O! Most true! She is a
strumpet. What news ?
Ros. None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
Ham. Then is doomsday near! But your news is not true. Let me
question more in particular. What have you, my good friends,
deserved at the hands of fortune that she sends you to prison
hither?
Guil. Prison, my lord?
Ham. Denmark's a prison.
Ros. Then is the world one.
Ham. A goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and
dungeons, denmark being one o' th' worst.
Ros. We think not so, my lord.
Ham. Why, then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing either good
or bad but thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.
Ros. Why, then your ambition makes it one. 'tis too narrow for your
mind.
Ham. O god, i could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a
king of infinite space, were it not that i have bad dreams.
Guil. Which dreams indeed are ambition; for the very substance of
the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
Ham. A dream itself is but a shadow.
Ros. Truly, and i hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that
it is but a shadow's shadow.
Ham. Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch'd
heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we to th' court? For, by my
fay, i cannot reason.
Both. We'll wait upon you.
Ham. No such matter! I will not sort you with the rest of my
servants; for, to speak to you like an honest man, i am most
dreadfully attended. But in the beaten way of friendship, what
make you at elsinore?
Ros. To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.
Ham. Beggar that i am, i am even poor in thanks; but i thank you;
and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were
you not sent for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free
visitation? Come, deal justly with me. Come, come! Nay, speak.
Guil. What should we say, my lord?
Ham. Why, anything- but to th' purpose. You were sent for; and
there is a kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties
have not craft enough to colour. I know the good king and queen
have sent for you.
Ros. To what end, my lord?
Ham. That you must teach me. But let me conjure you by the rights
of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the
obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a
better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with
me, whether you were sent for or no.
Ros. [aside to guildenstern] what say you?
Ham. [aside] nay then, i have an eye of you. - if you love me, hold
not off.
Guil. My lord, we were sent for.
Ham. I will tell you why. So shall my anticipation prevent your
discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no
feather. I have of late- but wherefore i know not- lost all my
mirth, forgone all custom of exercises; and indeed, it goes so
heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth,
seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the
air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical
roof fretted with golden fire- why, it appeareth no other thing
to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a
piece of work is a man! How noble in reason! How infinite in
faculties! In form and moving how express and admirable! In
action how like an angel! In apprehension how like a god! The
beauty of the world, the paragon of animals! And yet to me what
is this quintessence of dust? Man delights not me- no, nor woman
neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
Ros. My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
Ham. Why did you laugh then, when i said 'man delights not me'?
Ros. To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten
entertainment the players shall receive from you. We coted them
on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
Ham. He that plays the king shall be welcome- his majesty shall
have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and
target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall
end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind
freely, or the blank verse shall halt fort. What players are
they?
Ros. Even those you were wont to take such delight in, the
tragedians of the city.
Ham. How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in
reputation and profit, was better both ways.
Ros. I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late
innovation.
Ham. Do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the
city? Are they so follow'd?
Ros. No indeed are they not.
Ham. How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
Ros. Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is,
sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top
of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort. These are now
the fashion, and so berattle the common stages (so they call
them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and
dare scarce come thither.
Ham. What, are they children? Who maintains 'em? How are they
escoted? Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can
sing? Will they not say afterwards, if they should grow
themselves to common players (as it is most like, if their means
are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim
against their own succession.
Ros. Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation
holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was, for a
while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player
went to cuffs in the question.
Ham. Is't possible?
Guil. O, there has been much throwing about of brains.
Ham. Do the boys carry it away?
Ros. Ay, that they do, my lord- hercules and his load too.
Ham. It is not very strange; for my uncle is king of denmark, and
those that would make mows at him while my father lived give
twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in
little. 'sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if
philosophy could find it out.
Flourish for the players.
Guil. There are the players.
Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore. Your hands, come! Th'
appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players (which i
tell you must show fairly outwards) should more appear like
entertainment than yours. You are welcome. But my uncle-father
and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.
Guil. In what, my dear lord?
Ham. I am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly i
know a hawk from a handsaw.
Enter polonius.
Pol. Well be with you, gentlemen!
Ham. Hark you, guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer!
That great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling
clouts.
Ros. Happily he's the second time come to them; for they say an old
man is twice a child.
Ham. I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it. -
you say right, sir; a monday morning; twas so indeed.
Pol. My lord, i have news to tell you.
Ham. My lord, i have news to tell you. When roscius was an actor in
rome-
pol. The actors are come hither, my lord.
Ham. Buzz, buzz!
Pol. Upon my honour-
ham. Then came each actor on his ass-
pol. The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy,
history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral,
tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene
individable, or poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty, these are
the only men.
Ham. O jephthah, judge of israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
Pol. What treasure had he, my lord?
Ham. Why,
'one fair daughter, and no more,
the which he loved passing well. '
pol. [aside] still on my daughter.
Ham. Am i not i' th' right, old jephthah?
Pol. If you call me jephthah, my lord, i have a daughter that i
love passing well.
Ham. Nay, that follows not.
Pol. What follows then, my lord?
Ham. Why,
'as by lot, god wot, '
and then, you know,
'it came to pass, as most like it was. '
the first row of the pious chanson will show you more; for look
where my abridgment comes.
Enter four or five players.
You are welcome, masters; welcome, all. - i am glad to see thee
well. - welcome, good friends. - o, my old friend? Why, thy face is
valanc'd since i saw thee last. Com'st' thou to' beard me in
denmark? - what, my young lady and mistress? By'r lady, your
ladyship is nearer to heaven than when i saw you last by the
altitude of a chopine. Pray god your voice, like a piece of
uncurrent gold, be not crack'd within the ring. - masters, you are
all welcome. We'll e'en to't like french falconers, fly at
anything we see. We'll have a speech straight. Come, give us a
taste of your quality. Come, a passionate speech.
1. Play. What speech, my good lord?
Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted;
or if it was, not above once; for the play, i remember, pleas'd
not the million, 'twas caviary to the general; but it was (as i
receiv'd it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in
the top of mine) an excellent play, well digested in the scenes,
set down with as much modesty as cunning. I remember one said
there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury,
nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of
affectation; but call'd it an honest method, as wholesome as
sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in't
i chiefly lov'd. 'twas aeneas' tale to dido, and thereabout of it
especially where he speaks of priam's slaughter. If it live in
your memory, begin at this line- let me see, let me see:
'the rugged pyrrhus, like th' hyrcanian beast-'
'tis not so; it begins with pyrrhus:
'the rugged pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
black as his purpose, did the night resemble
when he lay couched in the ominous horse,
hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd
with heraldry more dismal. Head to foot
now is be total gules, horridly trick'd
with blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
that lend a tyrannous and a damned light
to their lord's murther. Roasted in wrath and fire,
and thus o'ersized with coagulate gore,
with eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhus
old grandsire priam seeks. '
so, proceed you.
Pol. Fore god, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good
discretion.
1. Play. 'anon he finds him,
striking too short at greeks. His antique sword,
rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
repugnant to command. Unequal match'd,
pyrrhus at priam drives, in rage strikes wide;
but with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
th' unnerved father falls. Then senseless ilium,
seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
takes prisoner pyrrhus' ear. For lo! His sword,
which was declining on the milky head
of reverend priam, seem'd i' th' air to stick.
So, as a painted tyrant, pyrrhus stood,
and, like a neutral to his will and matter,
did nothing.
But, as we often see, against some storm,
a silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
the bold winds speechless, and the orb below
as hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder
doth rend the region; so, after pyrrhus' pause,
aroused vengeance sets him new awork;
and never did the cyclops' hammers fall
on mars's armour, forg'd for proof eterne,
with less remorse than pyrrhus' bleeding sword
now falls on priam.
Out, out, thou strumpet fortune! All you gods,
in general synod take away her power;
break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
and bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
as low as to the fiends!
Pol. This is too long.
Ham. It shall to the barber's, with your beard. - prithee say on.
He's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. Say on; come to
hecuba.
1. Play. 'but who, o who, had seen the mobled queen-'
ham. 'the mobled queen'?
Pol. That's good! 'mobled queen' is good.
1. Play. 'run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames
with bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
about her lank and all o'erteemed loins,
a blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up-
who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd
'gainst fortune's state would treason have pronounc'd.
But if the gods themselves did see her then,
when she saw pyrrhus make malicious sport
in mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
the instant burst of clamour that she made
(unless things mortal move them not at all)
would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven
and passion in the gods. '
pol. Look, whe'r he has not turn'd his colour, and has tears in's
eyes. Prithee no more!
Ham. 'tis well. I'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon. -
good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? Do you
hear? Let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief
chronicles of the time. After your death you were better have a
bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
Pol. My lord, i will use them according to their desert.
Ham. God's bodykins, man, much better! Use every man after his
desert, and who should scape whipping? Use them after your own
honour and dignity. The less they deserve, the more merit is in
your bounty. Take them in.
Pol. Come, sirs.
Ham. Follow him, friends. We'll hear a play to-morrow.
Exeunt polonius and players [except the first].
Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play 'the murther of
gonzago'?
1. Play. Ay, my lord.
Ham. We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need, study a
speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which i would set down and
insert in't, could you not?
1. Play. Ay, my lord.
Ham. Very well. Follow that lord- and look you mock him not.
[exit first player. ]
my good friends, i'll leave you till night. You are welcome to
elsinore.
Ros. Good my lord!
Ham. Ay, so, god b' wi' ye!
[exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern
now i am alone.
O what a rogue and peasant slave am i!
Is it not monstrous that this player here,
but in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
could force his soul so to his own conceit
that, from her working, all his visage wann'd,
tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
a broken voice, and his whole function suiting
with forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!
For hecuba!
What's hecuba to him, or he to hecuba,
that he should weep for her? What would he do,
had he the motive and the cue for passion
that i have? He would drown the stage with tears
and cleave the general ear with horrid speech;
make mad the guilty and appal the free,
confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
the very faculties of eyes and ears.
Yet i,
a dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak
like john-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
and can say nothing! No, not for a king,
upon whose property and most dear life
a damn'd defeat was made. Am i a coward?
Who calls me villain? Breaks my pate across?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?
Tweaks me by th' nose? Gives me the lie i' th' throat
as deep as to the lungs? Who does me this, ha?
'swounds, i should take it! For it cannot be
but i am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
to make oppression bitter, or ere this
i should have fatted all the region kites
with this slave's offal. Bloody bawdy villain!
Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
O, vengeance!
Why, what an ass am i! This is most brave,
that i, the son of a dear father murther'd,
prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
must (like a whore) unpack my heart with words
and fall a-cursing like a very drab,
a scullion!
Fie upon't! Foh! About, my brain! Hum, i have heard
that guilty creatures, sitting at a play,
have by the very cunning of the scene
been struck so to the soul that presently
they have proclaim'd their malefactions;
for murther, though it have no tongue, will speak
with most miraculous organ, i'll have these players
play something like the murther of my father
before mine uncle. I'll observe his looks;
i'll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,
i know my course. The spirit that i have seen
may be a devil; and the devil hath power
t' assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
out of my weakness and my melancholy,
as he is very potent with such spirits,
abuses me to damn me. I'll have grounds
more relative than this. The play's the thing
wherein i'll catch the conscience of the king. Exit.
Act iii. Scene i.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Enter king, queen, polonius, ophelia, rosencrantz, guildenstern, and lords.
King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
get from him why he puts on this confusion,
grating so harshly all his days of quiet
with turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
Ros. He does confess he feels himself distracted,
but from what cause he will by no means speak.
Guil. Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
but with a crafty madness keeps aloof
when we would bring him on to some confession
of his true state.
Queen. Did he receive you well?
Ros. Most like a gentleman.
Guil. But with much forcing of his disposition.
Ros. Niggard of question, but of our demands
most free in his reply.
Queen. Did you assay him
to any pastime?
Ros. Madam, it so fell out that certain players
we o'erraught on the way. Of these we told him,
and there did seem in him a kind of joy
to hear of it. They are here about the court,
and, as i think, they have already order
this night to play before him.
Pol. 'tis most true;
and he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties
to hear and see the matter.
King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
to hear him so inclin'd.
Good gentlemen, give him a further edge
and drive his purpose on to these delights.
Ros. We shall, my lord.
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern.
King. Sweet gertrude, leave us too;
for we have closely sent for hamlet hither,
that he, as 'twere by accident, may here
affront ophelia.
Her father and myself (lawful espials)
will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,
we may of their encounter frankly judge
and gather by him, as he is behav'd,
if't be th' affliction of his love, or no,
that thus he suffers for.
Queen. I shall obey you;
and for your part, ophelia, i do wish
that your good beauties be the happy cause
of hamlet's wildness. So shall i hope your virtues
will bring him to his wonted way again,
to both your honours.
Oph. Madam, i wish it may.
[exit queen. ]
pol. Ophelia, walk you here. - gracious, so please you,
we will bestow ourselves. - [to ophelia] read on this book,
that show of such an exercise may colour
your loneliness. - we are oft to blame in this,
'tis too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage
and pious action we do sugar o'er
the devil himself.
King. [aside] o, 'tis too true!
How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
The harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring art,
is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
than is my deed to my most painted word.
O heavy burthen!
Pol. I hear him coming. Let's withdraw, my lord.
Exeunt king and polonius].
Enter hamlet.
Ham. To be, or not to be- that is the question:
whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
and by opposing end them. To die- to sleep-
no more; and by a sleep to say we end
the heartache, and the thousand natural shocks
that flesh is heir to. 'tis a consummation
devoutly to be wish'd. To die- to sleep.
To sleep- perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub!
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
when we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
must give us pause. There's the respect
that makes calamity of so long life.
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
the pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay,
the insolence of office, and the spurns
that patient merit of th' unworthy takes,
when he himself might his quietus make
with a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,
to grunt and sweat under a weary life,
but that the dread of something after death-
the undiscover'd country, from whose bourn
no traveller returns- puzzles the will,
and makes us rather bear those ills we have
than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,
and thus the native hue of resolution
is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
and enterprises of great pith and moment
with this regard their currents turn awry
and lose the name of action. - soft you now!
The fair ophelia! - nymph, in thy orisons
be all my sins rememb'red.
Oph. Good my lord,
how does your honour for this many a day?
Ham. I humbly thank you; well, well, well.
Oph. My lord, i have remembrances of yours
that i have longed long to re-deliver.
I pray you, now receive them.
Ham. No, not i!
I never gave you aught.
Oph. My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,
and with them words of so sweet breath compos'd
as made the things more rich. Their perfume lost,
take these again; for to the noble mind
rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
There, my lord.
Ham. Ha, ha! Are you honest?
Oph. My lord?
Ham. Are you fair?
Oph. What means your lordship?
Ham. That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no
discourse to your beauty.
Oph. Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
Ham. Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform
honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can
translate beauty into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox,
but now the time gives it proof. I did love you once.
Oph. Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
Ham. You should not have believ'd me; for virtue cannot so
inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. I loved you
not.
Oph. I was the more deceived.
Ham. Get thee to a nunnery! Why wouldst thou be a breeder of
sinners? I am myself indifferent honest, but yet i could accuse
me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.
I am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my
beck than i have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give
them shape, or time to act them in. What should such fellows as i
do, crawling between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves all;
believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery. Where's your
father?
Oph. At home, my lord.
Ham. Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool
nowhere but in's own house. Farewell.
Oph. O, help him, you sweet heavens!
Ham. If thou dost marry, i'll give thee this plague for thy dowry:
be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape
calumny. Get thee to a nunnery. Go, farewell. Or if thou wilt
needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what
monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go; and quickly too.
Farewell.
Oph. O heavenly powers, restore him!
Ham. I have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath
given you one face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you
amble, and you lisp; you nickname god's creatures and make your
wantonness your ignorance. Go to, i'll no more on't! It hath made
me mad. I say, we will have no moe marriages. Those that are
married already- all but one- shall live; the rest shall keep as
they are. To a nunnery, go. Exit.
Oph. O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
The courtier's, scholar's, soldier's, eye, tongue, sword,
th' expectancy and rose of the fair state,
the glass of fashion and the mould of form,
th' observ'd of all observers- quite, quite down!
And i, of ladies most deject and wretched,
that suck'd the honey of his music vows,
now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;
that unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
blasted with ecstasy. O, woe is me
t' have seen what i have seen, see what i see!
Enter king and polonius.
King. Love? His affections do not that way tend;
nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
was not like madness. There's something in his soul
o'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
and i do doubt the hatch and the disclose
will be some danger; which for to prevent,
i have in quick determination
thus set it down: he shall with speed to england
for the demand of our neglected tribute.
Haply the seas, and countries different,
with variable objects, shall expel
this something-settled matter in his heart,
whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
from fashion of himself. What think you on't?
Pol. It shall do well. But yet do i believe
the origin and commencement of his grief
sprung from neglected love. - how now, ophelia?
You need not tell us what lord hamlet said.
We heard it all. - my lord, do as you please;
but if you hold it fit, after the play
let his queen mother all alone entreat him
to show his grief. Let her be round with him;
and i'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear
of all their conference. If she find him not,
to england send him; or confine him where
your wisdom best shall think.
King. It shall be so.
Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go. Exeunt.
Scene ii.
Elsinore. Hall in the castle.
Enter hamlet and three of the players.
Ham. Speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronounc'd it to you,
trippingly on the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of our
players do, i had as live the town crier spoke my lines. Nor do
not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all
gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as i may say)
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a
temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it offends me to the
soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to
tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who
(for the most part) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb
shows and noise. I would have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing
termagant. It out-herods herod. Pray you avoid it.
Player. I warrant your honour.
Ham. Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your
tutor. Suit the action to the word, the word to the action; with
this special observance, that you o'erstep not the modesty of
nature: for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing,
whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold, as
'twere, the mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature,
scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his
form and pressure. Now this overdone, or come tardy off, though
it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious
grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance
o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be players that i
have seen play, and heard others praise, and that highly (not to
speak it profanely), that, neither having the accent of
christians, nor the gait of christian, pagan, nor man, have so
strutted and bellowed that i have thought some of nature's
journeymen had made men, and not made them well, they imitated
humanity so abominably.
Player. I hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us, sir.
Ham. O, reform it altogether! And let those that play your clowns
speak no more than is set down for them. For there be of them
that will themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren
spectators to laugh too, though in the mean time some necessary
question of the play be then to be considered. That's villanous
and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. Go
make you ready.
Exeunt players.
Enter polonius, rosencrantz, and guildenstern.
How now, my lord? Will the king hear this piece of work?
Pol. And the queen too, and that presently.
Ham. Bid the players make haste, [exit polonius. ] will you two
help to hasten them?
Both. We will, my lord. Exeunt they two.
Ham. What, ho, horatio!
Enter horatio.
Hor. Here, sweet lord, at your service.
Ham. Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
as e'er my conversation cop'd withal.
Hor. O, my dear lord!
Ham. Nay, do not think i flatter;
for what advancement may i hope from thee,
that no revenue hast but thy good spirits
to feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?
No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
and could of men distinguish, her election
hath scald thee for herself. For thou hast been
as one, in suff'ring all, that suffers nothing;
a man that fortune's buffets and rewards
hast ta'en with equal thanks; and blest are those
whose blood and judgment are so well commingled
that they are not a pipe for fortune's finger
to sound what stop she please. Give me that man
that is not passion's slave, and i will wear him
in my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
as i do thee. Something too much of this i
there is a play to-night before the king.
One scene of it comes near the circumstance,
which i have told thee, of my father's death.
I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
even with the very comment of thy soul
observe my uncle. If his occulted guilt
do not itself unkennel in one speech,
it is a damned ghost that we have seen,
and my imaginations are as foul
as vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;
for i mine eyes will rivet to his face,
and after we will both our judgments join
in censure of his seeming.
Hor. Well, my lord.
If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
and scape detecting, i will pay the theft.
Sound a flourish. [enter trumpets and kettledrums. Danish
march. [enter king, queen, polonius, ophelia, rosencrantz,
guildenstern, and other lords attendant, with the guard
carrying torches.
Ham. They are coming to the play. I must be idle.
Get you a place.
King. How fares our cousin hamlet?
Ham. Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. I eat the air,
promise-cramm'd. You cannot feed capons so.
King. I have nothing with this answer, hamlet. These words are not
mine.
Ham. No, nor mine now. [to polonius] my lord, you play'd once
i' th' university, you say?
Pol. That did i, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
Ham. What did you enact?
Pol. I did enact julius caesar; i was kill'd i' th' capitol; brutus
kill'd me.
Ham. It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be
the players ready.
Ros. Ay, my lord. They stay upon your patience.
Queen. Come hither, my dear hamlet, sit by me.
Ham. No, good mother. Here's metal more attractive.
Pol. [to the king] o, ho! Do you mark that?
Ham. Lady, shall i lie in your lap?
[sits down at ophelia's feet. ]
oph. No, my lord.
Ham. I mean, my head upon your lap?
Oph. Ay, my lord.
Ham. Do you think i meant country matters?
Oph. I think nothing, my lord.
Ham. That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.
Oph. What is, my lord?
Ham. Nothing.
Oph. You are merry, my lord.
Ham. Who, i?
Oph. Ay, my lord.
Ham. O god, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry?
For look you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died
within 's two hours.
Oph. Nay 'tis twice two months, my lord.
Ham. So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for i'll have a
suit of sables. O heavens! Die two months ago, and not forgotten
yet? Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life
half a year. But, by'r lady, he must build churches then; or else
shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose
epitaph is 'for o, for o, the hobby-horse is forgot! '
hautboys play. The dumb show enters.
Enter a king and a queen very lovingly; the queen embracing
him and he her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation
unto him. He takes her up, and declines his head upon her
neck. He lays him down upon a bank of flowers. She, seeing
him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his
crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and
leaves him. The queen returns, finds the king dead, and makes
passionate action. The poisoner with some three or four mutes,
comes in again, seem to condole with her. The dead body is
carried away. The poisoner wooes the queen with gifts; she
seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts
his love.
Exeunt.
Oph. What means this, my lord?
Ham. Marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.
Oph. Belike this show imports the argument of the play.
Enter prologue.
Ham. We shall know by this fellow. The players cannot keep counsel;
they'll tell all.
Oph. Will he tell us what this show meant?
Ham. Ay, or any show that you'll show him. Be not you asham'd to
show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
Oph. You are naught, you are naught! I'll mark the play.
Pro. For us, and for our tragedy,
here stooping to your clemency,
we beg your hearing patiently. [exit. ]
ham. Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?
Oph. 'tis brief, my lord.
Ham. As woman's love.
Enter [two players as] king and queen.
King. Full thirty times hath phoebus' cart gone round
neptune's salt wash and tellus' orbed ground,
and thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen
about the world have times twelve thirties been,
since love our hearts, and hymen did our hands,
unite comutual in most sacred bands.
Queen. So many journeys may the sun and moon
make us again count o'er ere love be done!
But woe is me! You are so sick of late,
so far from cheer and from your former state.
That i distrust you. Yet, though i distrust,
discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must;
for women's fear and love holds quantity,
in neither aught, or in extremity.
Now what my love is, proof hath made you know;
and as my love is siz'd, my fear is so.
Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
where little fears grow great, great love grows there.
King. Faith, i must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
my operant powers their functions leave to do.
And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
honour'd, belov'd, and haply one as kind
for husband shalt thou-
queen. O, confound the rest!
Such love must needs be treason in my breast.
When second husband let me be accurst!
None wed the second but who killed the first.
Ham. [aside] wormwood, wormwood!
Queen. The instances that second marriage move
are base respects of thrift, but none of love.
A second time i kill my husband dead
when second husband kisses me in bed.
King. I do believe you think what now you speak;
but what we do determine oft we break.
Purpose is but the slave to memory,
of violent birth, but poor validity;
which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,
but fill unshaken when they mellow be.
Most necessary 'tis that we forget
to pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.
What to ourselves in passion we propose,
the passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
The violence of either grief or joy
their own enactures with themselves destroy.
Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
that even our loves should with our fortunes change;
for 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,
the poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies;
and hitherto doth love on fortune tend,
for who not needs shall never lack a friend,
and who in want a hollow friend doth try,
directly seasons him his enemy.
But, orderly to end where i begun,
our wills and fates do so contrary run
that our devices still are overthrown;
our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.
So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
but die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
Queen. Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,
sport and repose lock from me day and night,
to desperation turn my trust and hope,
an anchor's cheer in prison be my scope,
each opposite that blanks the face of joy
meet what i would have well, and it destroy,
both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
if, once a widow, ever i be wife!
Ham. If she should break it now!
King. 'tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.
My spirits grow dull, and fain i would beguile
the tedious day with sleep.
Queen. Sleep rock thy brain,
[he] sleeps.
And never come mischance between us twain!
Exit.
Ham. Madam, how like you this play?
Queen. The lady doth protest too much, methinks.
Ham. O, but she'll keep her word.
King. Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in't?
Ham. No, no! They do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th'
world.
King. What do you call the play?
Ham. 'the mousetrap. ' marry, how? Tropically. This play is the
image of a murther done in vienna. Gonzago is the duke's name;
his wife, baptista. You shall see anon. 'tis a knavish piece of
work; but what o' that? Your majesty, and we that have free
souls, it touches us not. Let the gall'd jade winch; our withers
are unwrung.
Enter lucianus.
This is one lucianus, nephew to the king.
Oph. You are as good as a chorus, my lord.
Ham. I could interpret between you and your love, if i could see
the puppets dallying.
Oph. You are keen, my lord, you are keen.
Ham. It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.
Oph. Still better, and worse.
Ham. So you must take your husbands. - begin, murtherer. Pox, leave
thy damnable faces, and begin! Come, the croaking raven doth
bellow for revenge.
Luc. Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
confederate season, else no creature seeing;
thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
with hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
thy natural magic and dire property
on wholesome life usurp immediately.
Pours the poison in his ears.
Ham. He poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. His name's gonzago.
The story is extant, and written in very choice italian. You
shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of gonzago's wife.
Oph. The king rises.
Ham. What, frighted with false fire?
Queen. How fares my lord?
Pol. Give o'er the play.
King. Give me some light! Away!
All. Lights, lights, lights!
Exeunt all but hamlet and horatio.
Ham. Why, let the strucken deer go weep,
the hart ungalled play;
for some must watch, while some must sleep:
thus runs the world away.
Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my
fortunes turn turk with me-with two provincial roses on my raz'd
shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?
Hor. Half a share.
Ham. A whole one i!
For thou dost know, o damon dear,
this realm dismantled was
of jove himself; and now reigns here
a very, very- pajock.
Hor. You might have rhym'd.
Ham. O good horatio, i'll take the ghost's word for a thousand
pound! Didst perceive?
Hor. Very well, my lord.
Ham. Upon the talk of the poisoning?
Hor. I did very well note him.
Ham. Aha! Come, some music! Come, the recorders!
For if the king like not the comedy,
why then, belike he likes it not, perdy.
Come, some music!
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Guil. Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
Ham. Sir, a whole history.
Guil. The king, sir-
ham. Ay, sir, what of him?
Guil. Is in his retirement, marvellous distemper'd.
Ham. With drink, sir?
Guil. No, my lord; rather with choler.
Ham. Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to
the doctor; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps
plunge him into far more choler.
Guil. Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start
not so wildly from my affair.
Ham. I am tame, sir; pronounce.
Guil. The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit
hath sent me to you.
Ham. You are welcome.
Guil. Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed.
If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, i will do
your mother's commandment; if not, your pardon and my return
shall be the end of my business.
Ham. Sir, i cannot.
Guil. What, my lord?
Ham. Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseas'd. But, sir, such
answer is i can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say,
my mother. Therefore no more, but to the matter! My mother, you
say-
ros. Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into
amazement and admiration.
Ham. O wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no
sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? Impart.
Ros. She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any
further trade with us?
Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
your friend.
Ham. Sir, i lack advancement.
Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself
for your succession in denmark?
Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
musty.
Enter the players with recorders.
O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
into a toil?
Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
Guil. My lord, i cannot.
Ham. I pray you.
Guil. Believe me, i cannot.
Ham. I do beseech you.
Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
Guil. But these cannot i command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
have not the skill.
Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would
pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,
excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
speak. 'sblood, do you think i am easier to be play'd on than a
pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
you cannot play upon me.
Enter polonius.
God bless you, sir!
Pol. My lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.
Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
Ham. Or like a whale.
Pol. Very like a whale.
Ham. Then will i come to my mother by-and-by. - they fool me to the
top of my bent. - i will come by-and-by.
Pol. I will say so. Exit.
Ham. 'by-and-by' is easily said. - leave me, friends.
[exeunt all but hamlet. ]
'tis now the very witching time of night,
when churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
contagion to this world. Now could i drink hot blood
and do such bitter business as the day
would quake to look on. Soft! Now to my mother!
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
the soul of nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
i will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
how in my words somever she be shent,
to give them seals never, my soul, consent! Exit.
Scene iii.
A room in the castle.
Enter king, rosencrantz, and guildenstern.
King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
to let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
i your commission will forthwith dispatch,
and he to england shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
out of his lunacies.
Guil. We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
to keep those many many bodies safe
that live and feed upon your majesty.
Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
with all the strength and armour of the mind
to keep itself from noyance; but much more
that spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
the lives of many. The cesse of majesty
dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
what's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
each small annexment, petty consequence,
attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
King. Arm you, i pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
for we will fetters put upon this fear,
which now goes too free-footed.
Both. We will haste us.
Exeunt gentlemen.
Enter polonius.
Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras i'll convey myself
to hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
and, as you said, and wisely was it said,
'tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
the speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
and tell you what i know.
King. Thanks, dear my lord.
Exit [polonius].
O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
it hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
a brother's murther! Pray can i not,
though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
and, like a man to double business bound,
i stand in pause where i shall first begin,
and both neglect. What if this cursed hand
were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
to wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
but to confront the visage of offence?
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
to be forestalled ere we come to fall,
or pardon'd being down? Then i'll look up;
my fault is past. But, o, what form of prayer
can serve my turn? 'forgive me my foul murther'?
That cannot be; since i am still possess'd
of those effects for which i did the murther-
my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
In the corrupted currents of this world
offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
and oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
in his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
to give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
All may be well. He kneels.
Enter hamlet.
Ham. Now might i do it pat, now he is praying;
and now i'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
and so am i reveng'd. That would be scann'd.
A villain kills my father; and for that,
i, his sole son, do this same villain send
to heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may;
and how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
But in our circumstance and course of thought,
'tis heavy with him; and am i then reveng'd,
to take him in the purging of his soul,
when he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;
or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;
at gaming, swearing, or about some act
that has no relish of salvation in't-
then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
and that his soul may be as damn'd and black
as hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days. Exit.
King. [rises] my words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
Words without thoughts never to heaven go. Exit.
Scene iv.
The queen's closet.
Enter queen and polonius.
Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
and that your grace hath screen'd and stood between
much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you be round with him.
Ham. (within) mother, mother, mother!
Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; i hear him coming.
[polonius hides behind the arras. ]
enter hamlet.
Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Queen. Why, how now, hamlet?
Ham. What's the matter now?
Queen. Have you forgot me?
Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife,
and (would it were not so! ) you are my mother.
Queen. Nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.
Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge i
you go not till i set you up a glass
where you may see the inmost part of you.
Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
Help, help, ho!
Pol. [behind] what, ho! Help, help, help!
Ham. [draws] how now? A rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
[makes a pass through the arras and] kills polonius.
Pol. [behind] o, i am slain!
Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
Ham. Nay, i know not. Is it the king?
Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
as kill a king, and marry with his brother.
Queen. As kill a king?
Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
[lifts up the arras and sees polonius. ]
thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! Sit you down
and let me wring your heart; for so i shall
if it be made of penetrable stuff;
if damned custom have not braz'd it so
that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
Queen. What have i done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
in noise so rude against me?
Ham. Such an act
that blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
from the fair forehead of an innocent love,
and sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
as false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed
as from the body of contraction plucks
the very soul, and sweet religion makes
a rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
yea, this solidity and compound mass,
with tristful visage, as against the doom,
is thought-sick at the act.
Queen. Ay me, what act,
that roars so loud and thunders in the index?
Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
the counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow;
hyperion's curls; the front of jove himself;
an eye like mars, to threaten and command;
a station like the herald mercury
new lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
a combination and a form indeed
where every god did seem to set his seal
to give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear
blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
and batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes
you cannot call it love; for at your age
the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
and waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
but it reserv'd some quantity of choice
to serve in such a difference. What devil was't
that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
or but a sickly part of one true sense
could not so mope.
O shame! Where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
if thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
to flaming youth let virtue be as wax
and melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
when the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
since frost itself as actively doth burn,
and reason panders will.
Queen. O hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
and there i see such black and grained spots
as will not leave their tinct.
Ham. Nay, but to live
in the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
over the nasty sty!
Queen. O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
No more, sweet hamlet!
Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
a cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
that from a shelf the precious diadem stole
and put it in his pocket!
Queen. No more!
Enter the ghost in his nightgown.
Ham. A king of shreds and patches! -
save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
you heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
Queen. Alas, he's mad!
Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
that, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
th' important acting of your dread command?
O, say!
Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul
conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, hamlet.
Ham. How is it with you, lady?
Queen. Alas, how is't with you,
that you do bend your eye on vacancy,
and with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
and, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!
His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
would make them capable. - do not look upon me,
lest with this piteous action you convert
my stern effects. Then what i have to do
will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.
Queen. To whom do you speak this?
Ham. Do you see nothing there?
Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is i see.
Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?
Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Exit ghost.
Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
is very cunning in.
Ham. Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
and makes as healthful music. It is not madness
that i have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
and i the matter will reword; which madness
would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
lay not that flattering unction to your soul
that not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
and do not spread the compost on the weeds
to make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
for in the fatness of these pursy times
virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
Queen. O hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
and live the purer with the other half,
good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
that to the use of actions fair and good
he likewise gives a frock or livery,
that aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
and that shall lend a kind of easiness
to the next abstinence; the next more easy;
for use almost can change the stamp of nature,
and either [master] the devil, or throw him out
with wondrous potency. Once more, good night;
and when you are desirous to be blest,
i'll blessing beg of you. - for this same lord,
i do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
to punish me with this, and this with me,
that i must be their scourge and minister.
I will bestow him, and will answer well
the death i gave him. So again, good night.
I must be cruel, only to be kind;
thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.
One word more, good lady.
Queen. What shall i do?
Ham. Not this, by no means, that i bid you do:
let the bloat king tempt you again to bed;
pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
and let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
make you to ravel all this matter out,
that i essentially am not in madness,
but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know;
for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib
such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?
No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
unpeg the basket on the house's top,
let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,
to try conclusions, in the basket creep
and break your own neck down.
Queen. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
and breath of life, i have no life to breathe
what thou hast said to me.
Ham. I must to england; you know that?
Queen. Alack,
i had forgot! 'tis so concluded on.
Ham. There's letters seal'd; and my two schoolfellows,
whom i will trust as i will adders fang'd,
they bear the mandate; they must sweep my way
and marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
for 'tis the sport to have the enginer
hoist with his own petar; and 't shall go hard
but i will delve one yard below their mines
and blow them at the moon. O, 'tis most sweet
when in one line two crafts directly meet.
This man shall set me packing.
I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room. -
mother, good night. - indeed, this counsellor
is now most still, most secret, and most grave,
who was in life a foolish peating knave.
Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Good night, mother.
[exit the queen. Then] exit hamlet, tugging in
polonius.
Act iv. Scene i.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Enter king and queen, with rosencrantz and guildenstern.
King. There's matter in these sighs. These profound heaves
you must translate; 'tis fit we understand them.
Where is your son?
Queen. Bestow this place on us a little while.
[exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern. ]
ah, mine own lord, what have i seen to-night!
King. What, gertrude? How does hamlet?
Queen. Mad as the sea and wind when both contend
which is the mightier. In his lawless fit
behind the arras hearing something stir,
whips out his rapier, cries 'a rat, a rat! '
and in this brainish apprehension kills
the unseen good old man.
King. O heavy deed!
It had been so with us, had we been there.
His liberty is full of threats to all-
to you yourself, to us, to every one.
Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
It will be laid to us, whose providence
should have kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt
this mad young man. But so much was our love
we would not understand what was most fit,
but, like the owner of a foul disease,
to keep it from divulging, let it feed
even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
Queen. To draw apart the body he hath kill'd;
o'er whom his very madness, like some ore
among a mineral of metals base,
shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.
King. O gertrude, come away!
The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch
but we will ship him hence; and this vile deed
we must with all our majesty and skill
both countenance and excuse. Ho, guildenstern!
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Friends both, go join you with some further aid.
Hamlet in madness hath polonius slain,
and from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him.
Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
into the chapel. I pray you haste in this.
Exeunt [rosencrantz and guildenstern].
Come, gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends
and let them know both what we mean to do
and what's untimely done. [so haply slander-]
whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
as level as the cannon to his blank,
transports his poisoned shot- may miss our name
and hit the woundless air. - o, come away!
My soul is full of discord and dismay.
Exeunt.
Scene ii.
Elsinore. A passage in the castle.
Enter hamlet.
Ham. Safely stow'd.
Gentlemen. (within) hamlet! Lord hamlet!
Ham. But soft! What noise? Who calls on hamlet? O, here they come.
Enter rosencrantz and guildenstern.
Ros. What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
Ros. Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
and bear it to the chapel.
Ham. Do not believe it.
Ros. Believe what?
Ham. That i can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be
demanded of a sponge, what replication should be made by the son
of a king?
Ros. Take you me for a sponge, my lord?
Ham. Ay, sir; that soaks up the king's countenance, his rewards,
his authorities. But such officers do the king best service in
the end. He keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw;
first mouth'd, to be last swallowed. When he needs what you have
glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry
again.
Ros. I understand you not, my lord.
Ham. I am glad of it. A knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
Ros. My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to
the king.
Ham. The body is with the king, but the king is not with the body.
The king is a thing-
guil. A thing, my lord?
Ham. Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.
Exeunt.
Scene iii.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Enter king.
King. I have sent to seek him and to find the body.
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
Yet must not we put the strong law on him.
He's lov'd of the distracted multitude,
who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
and where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd,
but never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
this sudden sending him away must seem
deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown
by desperate appliance are reliev'd,
or not at all.
Enter rosencrantz.
How now o what hath befall'n?
Ros. Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
we cannot get from him.
King. But where is he?
Ros. Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
King. Bring him before us.
Ros. Ho, guildenstern! Bring in my lord.
Enter hamlet and guildenstern [with attendants].
King. Now, hamlet, where's polonius?
Ham. At supper.
King. At supper? Where?
Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten. A certain
convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your worm is your
only emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else to fat us, and
we fat ourselves for maggots. Your fat king and your lean beggar
is but variable service- two dishes, but to one table. That's the
end.
King. Alas, alas!
Ham. A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat
of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
King. What dost thou mean by this?
Ham. Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through
the guts of a beggar.
King. Where is polonius?
Ham. In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not
there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. But indeed, if you
find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up
the stair, into the lobby.
King. Go seek him there. [to attendants. ]
ham. He will stay till you come.
[exeunt attendants. ]
king. Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety, -
which we do tender as we dearly grieve
for that which thou hast done, - must send thee hence
with fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself.
The bark is ready and the wind at help,
th' associates tend, and everything is bent
for england.
Ham. For england?
King. Ay, hamlet.
Ham. Good.
King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
Ham. I see a cherub that sees them. But come, for england!
Farewell, dear mother.
King. Thy loving father, hamlet.
Ham. My mother! Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is
one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for england!
Exit.
King. Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard.
Delay it not; i'll have him hence to-night.
Away! For everything is seal'd and done
that else leans on th' affair. Pray you make haste.
Exeunt rosencrantz and guildenstern]
and, england, if my love thou hold'st at aught, -
as my great power thereof may give thee sense,
since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
after the danish sword, and thy free awe
pays homage to us, - thou mayst not coldly set
our sovereign process, which imports at full,
by letters congruing to that effect,
the present death of hamlet. Do it, england;
for like the hectic in my blood he rages,
and thou must cure me. Till i know 'tis done,
howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun. Exit.
Scene iv.
Near elsinore.
Enter fortinbras with his army over the stage.
For. Go, captain, from me greet the danish king.
Tell him that by his license fortinbras
craves the conveyance of a promis'd march
over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
If that his majesty would aught with us,
we shall express our duty in his eye;
and let him know so.
Capt. I will do't, my lord.
For. Go softly on.
Exeunt [all but the captain].
Enter hamlet, rosencrantz, [guildenstern, ] and others.
Ham. Good sir, whose powers are these?
Capt. They are of norway, sir.
Ham. How purpos'd, sir, i pray you?
Capt. Against some part of poland.
Ham. Who commands them, sir?
Capt. The nephew to old norway, fortinbras.
Ham. Goes it against the main of poland, sir,
or for some frontier?
Capt. Truly to speak, and with no addition,
we go to gain a little patch of ground
that hath in it no profit but the name.
To pay five ducats, five, i would not farm it;
nor will it yield to norway or the pole
a ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
Ham. Why, then the polack never will defend it.
Capt. Yes, it is already garrison'd.
Ham. Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
will not debate the question of this straw.
This is th' imposthume of much wealth and peace,
that inward breaks, and shows no cause without
why the man dies. - i humbly thank you, sir.
Capt. God b' wi' you, sir. [exit. ]
ros. Will't please you go, my lord?
Ham. I'll be with you straight. Go a little before.
[exeunt all but hamlet. ]
how all occasions do inform against me
and spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
if his chief good and market of his time
be but to sleep and feed? A beast, no more.
Sure he that made us with such large discourse,
looking before and after, gave us not
that capability and godlike reason
to fust in us unus'd. Now, whether it be
bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
of thinking too precisely on th' event, -
a thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
and ever three parts coward, - i do not know
why yet i live to say 'this thing's to do, '
sith i have cause, and will, and strength, and means
to do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me.
Witness this army of such mass and charge,
led by a delicate and tender prince,
whose spirit, with divine ambition puff'd,
makes mouths at the invisible event,
exposing what is mortal and unsure
to all that fortune, death, and danger dare,
even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great
is not to stir without great argument,
but greatly to find quarrel in a straw
when honour's at the stake. How stand i then,
that have a father klll'd, a mother stain'd,
excitements of my reason and my blood,
and let all sleep, while to my shame i see
the imminent death of twenty thousand men
that for a fantasy and trick of fame
go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
which is not tomb enough and continent
to hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
my thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth! Exit.
Scene v.
Elsinore. A room in the castle.
Enter horatio, queen, and a gentleman.
Queen. I will not speak with her.
Gent. She is importunate, indeed distract.
Her mood will needs be pitied.
Queen. What would she have?
Gent. She speaks much of her father; says she hears
there's tricks i' th' world, and hems, and beats her heart;
spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
that carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,
yet the unshaped use of it doth move
the hearers to collection; they aim at it,
and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them,
indeed would make one think there might be thought,
though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
Hor. 'twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.
Queen. Let her come in.
[exit gentleman. ]
[aside] to my sick soul (as sin's true nature is)
each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.
So full of artless jealousy is guilt
it spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
Enter ophelia distracted.
Oph. Where is the beauteous majesty of denmark?
Queen. How now, ophelia?
Oph. (sings)
how should i your true-love know
from another one?
By his cockle bat and' staff
and his sandal shoon.
Queen. Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
Oph. Say you? Nay, pray you mark.
(sings) he is dead and gone, lady,
he is dead and gone;
at his head a grass-green turf,
at his heels a stone.
O, ho!
Queen. Nay, but ophelia-
oph. Pray you mark.
(sings) white his shroud as the mountain snow-
enter king.
Queen. Alas, look here, my lord!
Oph. (sings)
larded all with sweet flowers;
which bewept to the grave did not go
with true-love showers.
King. How do you, pretty lady?
Oph. Well, god dild you! They say the owl was a baker's daughter.
Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at
your table!
King. Conceit upon her father.
Oph. Pray let's have no words of this; but when they ask, you what
it means, say you this:
(sings) to-morrow is saint valentine's day,
all in the morning bedtime,
and i a maid at your window,
to be your valentine.
Then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es
and dupp'd the chamber door,
let in the maid, that out a maid
never departed more.
King. Pretty ophelia!
Oph. Indeed, la, without an oath, i'll make an end on't!
[sings] by gis and by saint charity,
alack, and fie for shame!
Young men will do't if they come to't
by cock, they are to blame.
Quoth she, 'before you tumbled me,
you promis'd me to wed. '
he answers:
'so would i 'a' done, by yonder sun,
an thou hadst not come to my bed. '
king. How long hath she been thus?
Oph. I hope all will be well. We must be patient; but i cannot
choose but weep to think they would lay him i' th' cold ground.
My brother shall know of it; and so i thank you for your good
counsel. Come, my coach! Good night, ladies. Good night, sweet
ladies. Good night, good night. Exit
king. Follow her close; give her good watch, i pray you.
[exit horatio. ]
o, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
all from her father's death. O gertrude, gertrude,
when sorrows come, they come not single spies.
But in battalions! First, her father slain;
next, your son gone, and he most violent author
of his own just remove; the people muddied,
thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers
for good polonius' death, and we have done but greenly
in hugger-mugger to inter him; poor ophelia
divided from herself and her fair-judgment,
without the which we are pictures or mere beasts;
last, and as such containing as all these,
her brother is in secret come from france;
and wants not buzzers to infect his ear
feeds on his wonder, keep, himself in clouds,
with pestilent speeches of his father's death,
wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
will nothing stick our person to arraign
in ear and ear. O my dear gertrude, this,
like to a murd'ring piece, in many places
give, me superfluous death. A noise within.
Queen. Alack, what noise is this?
King. Where are my switzers? Let them guard the door.
Enter a messenger.
What is the matter?
Mess. Save yourself, my lord:
the ocean, overpeering of his list,
eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
than young laertes, in a riotous head,
o'erbears your offices. The rabble call him lord;
and, as the world were now but to begin,
antiquity forgot, custom not known,
the ratifiers and props of every word,
they cry 'choose we! Laertes shall be king! '
caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,
'laertes shall be king! Laertes king! '
a noise within.
Queen. How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!
O, this is counter, you false danish dogs!
King. The doors are broke.
Enter laertes with others.
Laer. Where is this king? - sirs, staid you all without.
All. No, let's come in!
Laer. I pray you give me leave.
All. We will, we will!
Laer. I thank you. Keep the door. [exeunt his followers. ]
o thou vile king,
give me my father!
Queen. Calmly, good laertes.
Laer. That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard;
cries cuckold to my father; brands the harlot
even here between the chaste unsmirched brows
of my true mother.
King. What is the cause, laertes,
that thy rebellion looks so giantlike?
Let him go, gertrude. Do not fear our person.
There's such divinity doth hedge a king
that treason can but peep to what it would,
acts little of his will. Tell me, laertes,
why thou art thus incens'd. Let him go, gertrude.
Speak, man.
Laer. Where is my father?
King. Dead.
Queen. But not by him!
King. Let him demand his fill.
Laer. How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:
to hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil
conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
I dare damnation. To this point i stand,
that both the world, i give to negligence,
let come what comes; only i'll be reveng'd
most throughly for my father.
King. Who shall stay you?
Laer. My will, not all the world!
And for my means, i'll husband them so well
they shall go far with little.
King. Good laertes,
if you desire to know the certainty
of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge
that swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe,
winner and loser?
Laer. None but his enemies.
King. Will you know them then?
Laer. To his good friends thus wide i'll ope my arms
and, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican,
repast them with my blood.
King. Why, now you speak
like a good child and a true gentleman.
That i am guiltless of your father's death,
and am most sensibly in grief for it,
it shall as level to your judgment pierce
as day does to your eye.
A noise within: 'let her come in. '
laer. How now? What noise is that?
Enter ophelia.
O heat, dry up my brains! Tears seven times salt
burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight
till our scale turn the beam. O rose of may!
Dear maid, kind sister, sweet ophelia!
O heavens! Is't possible a young maid's wits
should be as mortal as an old man's life?
Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
it sends some precious instance of itself
after the thing it loves.
Oph. (sings)
they bore him barefac'd on the bier
(hey non nony, nony, hey nony)
and in his grave rain'd many a tear.
Fare you well, my dove!
Laer. Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
it could not move thus.
Oph. You must sing 'a-down a-down, and you call him a-down-a. ' o,
how the wheel becomes it! It is the false steward, that stole his
master's daughter.
Laer. This nothing's more than matter.
Oph. There's rosemary, that's for remembrance. Pray you, love,
remember. And there is pansies, that's for thoughts.
Laer. A document in madness! Thoughts and remembrance fitted.
Oph. There's fennel for you, and columbines. There's rue for you,
and here's some for me. We may call it herb of grace o' sundays.
O, you must wear your rue with a difference! There's a daisy. I
would give you some violets, but they wither'd all when my father
died. They say he made a good end.
[sings] for bonny sweet robin is all my joy.
Laer. Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
she turns to favour and to prettiness.
Oph. (sings)
and will he not come again?
And will he not come again?
No, no, he is dead;
go to thy deathbed;
he never will come again.
His beard was as white as snow,
all flaxen was his poll.
He is gone, he is gone,
and we cast away moan.
God 'a'mercy on his soul!
And of all christian souls, i pray god. God b' wi', you.
Exit.
Laer. Do you see this, o god?
King. Laertes, i must commune with your grief,
or you deny me right. Go but apart,
make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,
and they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me.
If by direct or by collateral hand
they find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
our crown, our life, and all that we call ours,
to you in satisfaction; but if not,
be you content to lend your patience to us,
and we shall jointly labour with your soul
to give it due content.
Laer. Let this be so.
His means of death, his obscure funeral-
no trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
no noble rite nor formal ostentation, -
cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
that i must call't in question.
King. So you shall;
and where th' offence is let the great axe fall.
I pray you go with me.
Exeunt
scene vi.
Elsinore. Another room in the castle.
Enter horatio with an attendant.
Hor. What are they that would speak with me?
Servant. Seafaring men, sir. They say they have letters for you.
Hor. Let them come in.
[exit attendant. ]
i do not know from what part of the world
i should be greeted, if not from lord hamlet.
Enter sailors.
Sailor. God bless you, sir.
Hor. Let him bless thee too.
Sailor. 'a shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for you,
sir, - it comes from th' ambassador that was bound for england- if
your name be horatio, as i am let to know it is.
Hor. (reads the letter) 'horatio, when thou shalt have overlook'd
this, give these fellows some means to the king. They have
letters for him. Ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of
very warlike appointment gave us chase. Finding ourselves too
slow of sail, we put on a compelled valour, and in the grapple i
boarded them. On the instant they got clear of our ship; so i
alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with me like thieves
of mercy; but they knew what they did: i am to do a good turn for
them. Let the king have the letters i have sent, and repair thou
to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I have words
to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too
light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring
thee where i am. Rosencrantz and guildenstern hold their course
for england. Of them i have much to tell thee. Farewell.
'he that thou knowest thine, hamlet. '
come, i will give you way for these your letters,
and do't the speedier that you may direct me
to him from whom you brought them. Exeunt.
Scene vii.
Elsinore. Another room in the castle.
Enter king and laertes.
King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
and you must put me in your heart for friend,
sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
that he which hath your noble father slain
pursued my life.
Laer. It well appears. But tell me
why you proceeded not against these feats
so crimeful and so capital in nature,
as by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
you mainly were stirr'd up.
King. O, for two special reasons,
which may to you, perhaps, seein much unsinew'd,
but yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother
lives almost by his looks; and for myself, -
my virtue or my plague, be it either which, -
she's so conjunctive to my life and soul
that, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
i could not but by her. The other motive
why to a public count i might not go
is the great love the general gender bear him,
who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows,
too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
would have reverted to my bow again,
and not where i had aim'd them.
Laer. And so have i a noble father lost;
a sister driven into desp'rate terms,
whose worth, if praises may go back again,
stood challenger on mount of all the age
for her perfections. But my revenge will come.
King. Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think
that we are made of stuff so flat and dull
that we can let our beard be shook with danger,
and think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.
I lov'd your father, and we love ourself,
and that, i hope, will teach you to imagine-
enter a messenger with letters.
How now? What news?
Mess. Letters, my lord, from hamlet:
this to your majesty; this to the queen.
King. From hamlet? Who brought them?
Mess. Sailors, my lord, they say; i saw them not.
They were given me by claudio; he receiv'd them
of him that brought them.
King. Laertes, you shall hear them.
Leave us.
Exit messenger.
[reads]'high and mighty, -you shall know i am set naked on your
kingdom. To-morrow shall i beg leave to see your kingly eyes;
when i shall (first asking your pardon thereunto) recount the
occasion of my sudden and more strange return.
'hamlet. '
what should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?
Laer. Know you the hand?
King. 'tis hamlet's character. 'naked! '
and in a postscript here, he says 'alone. '
can you advise me?
Laer. I am lost in it, my lord. But let him come!
It warms the very sickness in my heart
that i shall live and tell him to his teeth,
'thus didest thou. '
king. If it be so, laertes
(as how should it be so? How otherwise? ),
will you be rul'd by me?
Laer. Ay my lord,
so you will not o'errule me to a peace.
King. To thine own peace. If he be now return'd
as checking at his voyage, and that he means
no more to undertake it, i will work him
to exploit now ripe in my device,
under the which he shall not choose but fall;
and for his death no wind
but even his mother shall uncharge the practice
and call it accident.
Laer. My lord, i will be rul'd;
the rather, if you could devise it so
that i might be the organ.
King. It falls right.
You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
and that in hamlet's hearing, for a quality
wherein they say you shine, your sun of parts
did not together pluck such envy from him
as did that one; and that, in my regard,
of the unworthiest siege.
Laer. What part is that, my lord?
King. A very riband in the cap of youth-
yet needfull too; for youth no less becomes
the light and careless livery that it wears
thin settled age his sables and his weeds,
importing health and graveness. Two months since
here was a gentleman of normandy.
I have seen myself, and serv'd against, the french,
and they can well on horseback; but this gallant
had witchcraft in't. He grew unto his seat,
and to such wondrous doing brought his horse
as had he been incorps'd and demi-natur'd
with the brave beast. So far he topp'd my thought
that i, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
come short of what he did.
Laer. A norman was't?
King. A norman.
Laer. Upon my life, lamound.
King. The very same.
Laer. I know him well. He is the broach indeed
and gem of all the nation.
King. He made confession of you;
and gave you such a masterly report
for art and exercise in your defence,
and for your rapier most especially,
that he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed
if one could match you. The scrimers of their nation
he swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
if you oppos'd them. Sir, this report of his
did hamlet so envenom with his envy
that he could nothing do but wish and beg
your sudden coming o'er to play with you.
Now, out of this-
laer. What out of this, my lord?
King. Laertes, was your father dear to you?
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
a face without a heart, '
laer. Why ask you this?
King. Not that i think you did not love your father;
but that i know love is begun by time,
and that i see, in passages of proof,
time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
There lives within the very flame of love
a kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
and nothing is at a like goodness still;
for goodness, growing to a plurisy,
dies in his own too-much. That we would do,
we should do when we would; for this 'would' changes,
and hath abatements and delays as many
as there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
and then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
that hurts by easing. But to the quick o' th' ulcer!
Hamlet comes back. What would you undertake
to show yourself your father's son in deed
more than in words?
Laer. To cut his throat i' th' church!
King. No place indeed should murther sanctuarize;
revenge should have no bounds. But, good laertes,
will you do this? Keep close within your chamber.
Will return'd shall know you are come home.
We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
and set a double varnish on the fame
the frenchman gave you; bring you in fine together
and wager on your heads. He, being remiss,
most generous, and free from all contriving,
will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,
or with a little shuffling, you may choose
a sword unbated, and, in a pass of practice,
requite him for your father.
Laer. I will do't!
And for that purpose i'll anoint my sword.
I bought an unction of a mountebank,
so mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
collected from all simples that have virtue
under the moon, can save the thing from death
this is but scratch'd withal. I'll touch my point
with this contagion, that, if i gall him slightly,
it may be death.
King. Let's further think of this,
weigh what convenience both of time and means
may fit us to our shape. If this should fall,
and that our drift look through our bad performance.
'twere better not assay'd. Therefore this project
should have a back or second, that might hold
if this did blast in proof. Soft! Let me see.
We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings-
i ha't!
When in your motion you are hot and dry-
as make your bouts more violent to that end-
and that he calls for drink, i'll have prepar'd him
a chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
if he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
our purpose may hold there. - but stay, what noise,
enter queen.
How now, sweet queen?
Queen. One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
so fast they follow. Your sister's drown'd, laertes.
Laer. Drown'd! O, where?
Queen. There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
that shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream.
There with fantastic garlands did she come
of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,
that liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
but our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them.
There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds
clamb'ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,
when down her weedy trophies and herself
fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide
and, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up;
which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
as one incapable of her own distress,
or like a creature native and indued
unto that element; but long it could not be
till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
to muddy death.
Laer. Alas, then she is drown'd?
Queen. Drown'd, drown'd.
Laer. Too much of water hast thou, poor ophelia,
and therefore i forbid my tears; but yet
it is our trick; nature her custom holds,
let shame say what it will. When these are gone,
the woman will be out. Adieu, my lord.
I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze
but that this folly douts it. Exit.
King. Let's follow, gertrude.
How much i had to do to calm his rage i
now fear i this will give it start again;
therefore let's follow.
Exeunt.
Act v. Scene i.
Elsinore. A churchyard.
Enter two clowns, [with spades and pickaxes].
Clown. Is she to be buried in christian burial when she wilfully
seeks her own salvation?
Other. I tell thee she is; therefore make her grave straight.
The crowner hath sate on her, and finds it christian burial.
Clown. How can that be, unless she drown'd herself in her own
defence?
Other. Why, 'tis found so.
Clown. It must be se offendendo; it cannot be else. For here lies
the point: if i drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an
act hath three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform;
argal, she drown'd herself wittingly.
Other. Nay, but hear you, goodman delver!
Clown. Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the
man; good. If the man go to this water and drown himself, it is,
will he nill he, he goes- mark you that. But if the water come to
him and drown him, he drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not
guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.
Other. But is this law?
Clown. Ay, marry, is't- crowner's quest law.
Other. Will you ha' the truth an't? If this had not been a
gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' christian burial.
Clown. Why, there thou say'st! And the more pity that great folk
should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves
more than their even-christen. Come, my spade! There is no
ancient gentlemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and grave-makers. They
hold up adam's profession.
Other. Was he a gentleman?
Clown. 'a was the first that ever bore arms.
Other. Why, he had none.
Clown. What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the scripture?
The scripture says adam digg'd. Could he dig without arms? I'll
put another question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the
purpose, confess thyself-
other. Go to!
Clown. What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the
shipwright, or the carpenter?
Other. The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand
tenants.
Clown. I like thy wit well, in good faith. The gallows does well.
But how does it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now,
thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the
church. Argal, the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come!
Other. Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a
carpenter?
Clown. Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
Other. Marry, now i can tell!
Clown. To't.
Other. Mass, i cannot tell.
Enter hamlet and horatio afar off.
Clown. Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will
not mend his pace with beating; and when you are ask'd this
question next, say 'a grave-maker. ' the houses he makes lasts
till doomsday. Go, get thee to yaughan; fetch me a stoup of
liquor.
[exit second clown. ]
[clown digs and] sings.
In youth when i did love, did love,
methought it was very sweet;
to contract- o- the time for- a- my behove,
o, methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet.
Ham. Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at
grave-making?
Hor. Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.
Ham. 'tis e'en so. The hand of little employment hath the daintier
sense.
Clown. (sings)
but age with his stealing steps
hath clawed me in his clutch,
and hath shipped me intil the land,
as if i had never been such.
[throws up a skull. ]
ham. That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the
knave jowls it to the ground, as if 'twere cain's jawbone, that
did the first murther! This might be the pate of a politician,
which this ass now o'erreaches; one that would circumvent god,
might it not?
Hor. It might, my lord.
Ham. Or of a courtier, which could say 'good morrow, sweet lord!
How dost thou, good lord? ' this might be my lord such-a-one, that
prais'd my lord such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might
it not?
Hor. Ay, my lord.
Ham. Why, e'en so! And now my lady worm's, chapless, and knock'd
about the mazzard with a sexton's spade. Here's fine revolution,
and we had the trick to see't. Did these bones cost no more the
breeding but to play at loggets with 'em? Mine ache to think
on't.
Clown. (sings)
a pickaxe and a spade, a spade,
for and a shrouding sheet;
o, a pit of clay for to be made
for such a guest is meet.
Throws up [another skull].
Ham. There's another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer?
Where be his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures,
and his tricks? Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock
him about the sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him
of his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be in's time a
great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his
fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. Is this the fine of
his fines, and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers vouch him no more of
his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth
of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his lands will
scarcely lie in this box; and must th' inheritor himself have no
more, ha?
Hor. Not a jot more, my lord.
Ham. Is not parchment made of sheepskins?
Hor. Ay, my lord, and of calveskins too.
Ham. They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that. I
will speak to this fellow. Whose grave's this, sirrah?
Clown. Mine, sir.
[sings] o, a pit of clay for to be made
for such a guest is meet.
Ham. I think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in't.
Clown. You lie out on't, sir, and therefore 'tis not yours.
For my part, i do not lie in't, yet it is mine.
Ham. Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine. 'tis for
the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.
Clown. 'tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to you.
Ham. What man dost thou dig it for?
Clown. For no man, sir.
Ham. What woman then?
Clown. For none neither.
Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
Clown. One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.
Ham. How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or
equivocation will undo us. By the lord, horatio, this three years
i have taken note of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe
of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls
his kibe. - how long hast thou been a grave-maker?
Clown. Of all the days i' th' year, i came to't that day that our
last king hamlet overcame fortinbras.
Ham. How long is that since?
Clown. Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the
very day that young hamlet was born- he that is mad, and sent
into england.
Ham. Ay, marry, why was be sent into england?
Clown. Why, because 'a was mad. 'a shall recover his wits there;
or, if 'a do not, 'tis no great matter there.
Ham. Why?
Clown. 'twill not he seen in him there. There the men are as mad as
he.
Ham. How came he mad?
Clown. Very strangely, they say.
Ham. How strangely?
Clown. Faith, e'en with losing his wits.
Ham. Upon what ground?
Clown. Why, here in denmark. I have been sexton here, man and boy
thirty years.
Ham. How long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
Clown. Faith, if 'a be not rotten before 'a die (as we have many
pocky corses now-a-days that will scarce hold the laying in, i
will last you some eight year or nine year. A tanner will last
you nine year.
Ham. Why he more than another?
Clown. Why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will
keep out water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of
your whoreson dead body. Here's a skull now. This skull hath lien
you i' th' earth three-and-twenty years.
Ham. Whose was it?
Clown. A whoreson, mad fellow's it was. Whose do you think it was?
Ham. Nay, i know not.
Clown. A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! 'a pour'd a flagon of
rhenish on my head once. This same skull, sir, was yorick's
skull, the king's jester.
Ham. This?
Clown. E'en that.
Ham. Let me see. [takes the skull. ] alas, poor yorick! I knew him,
horatio. A fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He
hath borne me on his back a thousand tunes. And now how abhorred
in my imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those
lips that i have kiss'd i know not how oft. Where be your gibes
now? Your gambols? Your songs? Your flashes of merriment that
were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one now, to mock your
own grinning? Quite chap- fall'n? Now get you to my lady's
chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this
favour she must come. Make her laugh at that. Prithee, horatio,
tell me one thing.
Hor. What's that, my lord?
Ham. Dost thou think alexander look'd o' this fashion i' th' earth?
Hor. E'en so.
Ham. And smelt so? Pah!
[puts down the skull. ]
hor. E'en so, my lord.
Ham. To what base uses we may return, horatio! Why may not
imagination trace the noble dust of alexander till he find it
stopping a bunghole?
Hor. 'twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.
Ham. No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with modesty
enough, and likelihood to lead it; as thus: alexander died,
alexander was buried, alexander returneth into dust; the dust is
earth; of earth we make loam; and why of that loam (whereto he
was converted) might they not stop a beer barrel?
Imperious caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
might stop a hole to keep the wind away.
O, that that earth which kept the world in awe
should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw!
But soft! But soft! Aside! Here comes the king-
enter [priests with] a coffin [in funeral procession], king,
queen, laertes, with lords attendant. ]
the queen, the courtiers. Who is this they follow?
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
the corse they follow did with desp'rate hand
fordo it own life. 'twas of some estate.
Couch we awhile, and mark.
[retires with horatio. ]
laer. What ceremony else?
Ham. That is laertes,
a very noble youth. Mark.
Laer. What ceremony else?
Priest. Her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd
as we have warranty. Her death was doubtful;
and, but that great command o'ersways the order,
she should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd
till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,
shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.
Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
her maiden strewments, and the bringing home
of bell and burial.
Laer. Must there no more be done?
Priest. No more be done.
We should profane the service of the dead
to sing a requiem and such rest to her
as to peace-parted souls.
Laer. Lay her i' th' earth;
and from her fair and unpolluted flesh
may violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
a minist'ring angel shall my sister be
when thou liest howling.
Ham. What, the fair ophelia?
Queen. Sweets to the sweet! Farewell.
[scatters flowers. ]
i hop'd thou shouldst have been my hamlet's wife;
i thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
and not have strew'd thy grave.
Laer. O, treble woe
fall ten times treble on that cursed head
whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
depriv'd thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
till i have caught her once more in mine arms.
Leaps in the grave.
Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead
till of this flat a mountain you have made
t' o'ertop old pelion or the skyish head
of blue olympus.
Ham. [comes forward] what is he whose grief
bears such an emphasis? Whose phrase of sorrow
conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand
like wonder-wounded hearers? This is i,
hamlet the dane. [leaps in after laertes.
Laer. The devil take thy soul!
[grapples with him].
Ham. Thou pray'st not well.
I prithee take thy fingers from my throat;
for, though i am not splenitive and rash,
yet have i in me something dangerous,
which let thy wisdom fear. Hold off thy hand!
King. Pluck thein asunder.
Queen. Hamlet, hamlet!
All. Gentlemen!
Hor. Good my lord, be quiet.
[the attendants part them, and they come out of the
grave. ]
ham. Why, i will fight with him upon this theme
until my eyelids will no longer wag.
Queen. O my son, what theme?
Ham. I lov'd ophelia. Forty thousand brothers
could not (with all their quantity of love)
make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?
King. O, he is mad, laertes.
Queen. For love of god, forbear him!
Ham. 'swounds, show me what thou't do.
Woo't weep? Woo't fight? Woo't fast? Woo't tear thyself?
Woo't drink up esill? Eat a crocodile?
I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?
To outface me with leaping in her grave?
Be buried quick with her, and so will i.
And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
millions of acres on us, till our ground,
singeing his pate against the burning zone,
make ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
i'll rant as well as thou.
Queen. This is mere madness;
and thus a while the fit will work on him.
Anon, as patient as the female dove
when that her golden couplets are disclos'd,
his silence will sit drooping.
Ham. Hear you, sir!
What is the reason that you use me thus?
I lov'd you ever. But it is no matter.
Let hercules himself do what he may,
the cat will mew, and dog will have his day.
Exit.
King. I pray thee, good horatio, wait upon him.
Exit horatio.
[to laertes] strengthen your patience in our last night's speech.
We'll put the matter to the present push. -
good gertrude, set some watch over your son. -
this grave shall have a living monument.
An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
till then in patience our proceeding be.
Exeunt.
Scene ii.
Elsinore. A hall in the castle.
Enter hamlet and horatio.
Ham. So much for this, sir; now shall you see the other.
You do remember all the circumstance?
Hor. Remember it, my lord!
Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
that would not let me sleep. Methought i lay
worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly-
and prais'd be rashness for it; let us know,
our indiscretion sometime serves us well
when our deep plots do pall; and that should learn us
there's a divinity that shapes our ends,
rough-hew them how we will-
hor. That is most certain.
Ham. Up from my cabin,
my sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
grop'd i to find out them; had my desire,
finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
to mine own room again; making so bold
(my fears forgetting manners) to unseal
their grand commission; where i found, horatio
(o royal knavery! ), an exact command,
larded with many several sorts of reasons,
importing denmark's health, and england's too,
with, hoo! Such bugs and goblins in my life-
that, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
no, not to stay the finding of the axe,
my head should be struck off.
Hor. Is't possible?
Ham. Here's the commission; read it at more leisure.
But wilt thou bear me how i did proceed?
Hor. I beseech you.
Ham. Being thus benetted round with villanies,
or i could make a prologue to my brains,
they had begun the play. I sat me down;
devis'd a new commission; wrote it fair.
I once did hold it, as our statists do,
a baseness to write fair, and labour'd much
how to forget that learning; but, sir, now
it did me yeoman's service. Wilt thou know
th' effect of what i wrote?
Hor. Ay, good my lord.
Ham. An earnest conjuration from the king,
as england was his faithful tributary,
as love between them like the palm might flourish,
as peace should still her wheaten garland wear
and stand a comma 'tween their amities,
and many such-like as's of great charge,
that, on the view and knowing of these contents,
without debatement further, more or less,
he should the bearers put to sudden death,
not shriving time allow'd.
Hor. How was this seal'd?
Ham. Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
I had my father's signet in my purse,
which was the model of that danish seal;
folded the writ up in the form of th' other,
subscrib'd it, gave't th' impression, plac'd it safely,
the changeling never known. Now, the next day
was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
thou know'st already.
Hor. So guildenstern and rosencrantz go to't.
Ham. Why, man, they did make love to this employment!
They are not near my conscience; their defeat
does by their own insinuation grow.
'tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
between the pass and fell incensed points
of mighty opposites.
Hor. Why, what a king is this!
Ham. Does it not, thinks't thee, stand me now upon-
he that hath kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother;
popp'd in between th' election and my hopes;
thrown out his angle for my proper life,
and with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience
to quit him with this arm? And is't not to be damn'd
to let this canker of our nature come
in further evil?
Hor. It must be shortly known to him from england
what is the issue of the business there.
Ham. It will be short; the interim is mine,
and a man's life is no more than to say 'one. '
but i am very sorry, good horatio,
that to laertes i forgot myself,
for by the image of my cause i see
the portraiture of his. I'll court his favours.
But sure the bravery of his grief did put me
into a tow'ring passion.
Hor. Peace! Who comes here?
Enter young osric, a courtier.
Osr. Your lordship is right welcome back to denmark.
Ham. I humbly thank you, sir. [aside to horatio] dost know this
waterfly?
Hor. [aside to hamlet] no, my good lord.
Ham. [aside to horatio] thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a
vice to know him. He hath much land, and fertile. Let a beast be
lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'tis
a chough; but, as i say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
Osr. Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, i should impart
a thing to you from his majesty.
Ham. I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. Put your
bonnet to his right use. 'tis for the head.
Osr. I thank your lordship, it is very hot.
Ham. No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is northerly.
Osr. It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
Ham. But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
Osr. Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry, as 'twere- i cannot
tell how. But, my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that
he has laid a great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter-
ham. I beseech you remember.
[hamlet moves him to put on his hat. ]
osr. Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is
newly come to court laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman,
full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and
great showing. Indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card
or calendar of gentry; for you shall find in him the continent of
what part a gentleman would see.
Ham. Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you; though, i
know, to divide him inventorially would dozy th' arithmetic of
memory, and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail.
But, in the verity of extolment, i take him to be a soul of great
article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make
true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror, and who else
would trace him, his umbrage, nothing more.
Osr. Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
Ham. The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more
rawer breath
osr. Sir?
Hor [aside to hamlet] is't not possible to understand in another
tongue? You will do't, sir, really.
Ham. What imports the nomination of this gentleman
osr. Of laertes?
Hor. [aside] his purse is empty already. All's golden words are
spent.
Ham. Of him, sir.
Osr. I know you are not ignorant-
ham. I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did, it would not
much approve me. Well, sir?
Osr. You are not ignorant of what excellence laertes is-
ham. I dare not confess that, lest i should compare with him in
excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.
Osr. I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him
by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
Ham. What's his weapon?
Osr. Rapier and dagger.
Ham. That's two of his weapons- but well.
Osr. The king, sir, hath wager'd with him six barbary horses;
against the which he has impon'd, as i take it, six french
rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and
so. Three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy,
very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of
very liberal conceit.
Ham. What call you the carriages?
Hor. [aside to hamlet] i knew you must be edified by the margent
ere you had done.
Osr. The carriages, sir, are the hangers.
Ham. The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could
carry cannon by our sides. I would it might be hangers till then.
But on! Six barbary horses against six french swords, their
assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the french
bet against the danish. Why is this all impon'd, as you call it?
Osr. The king, sir, hath laid that, in a dozen passes between
yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he hath
laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial
if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
Ham. How if i answer no?
Osr. I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
Ham. Sir, i will walk here in the hall. If it please his majesty,
it is the breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be
brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose,
i will win for him if i can; if not, i will gain nothing but my
shame and the odd hits.
Osr. Shall i redeliver you e'en so?
Ham. To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
Osr. I commend my duty to your lordship.
Ham. Yours, yours. [exit osric. ] he does well to commend it
himself; there are no tongues else for's turn.
Hor. This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
Ham. He did comply with his dug before he suck'd it. Thus has he,
and many more of the same bevy that i know the drossy age dotes
on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter-
a kind of yesty collection, which carries them through and
through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions; and do but blow
them to their trial-the bubbles are out,
enter a lord.
Lord. My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young osric, who
brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. He sends to
know if your pleasure hold to play with laertes, or that you will
take longer time.
Ham. I am constant to my purposes; they follow the king's pleasure.
If his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided
i be so able as now.
Lord. The king and queen and all are coming down.
Ham. In happy time.
Lord. The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to
laertes before you fall to play.
Ham. She well instructs me.
[exit lord. ]
hor. You will lose this wager, my lord.
Ham. I do not think so. Since he went into france i have been in
continual practice. I shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not
think how ill all's here about my heart. But it is no matter.
Hor. Nay, good my lord -
ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as
would perhaps trouble a woman.
Hor. If your mind dislike anything, obey it. I will forestall their
repair hither and say you are not fit.
Ham. Not a whit, we defy augury; there's a special providence in
the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not to come', if it be
not to come, it will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come:
the readiness is all. Since no man knows aught of what he leaves,
what is't to leave betimes? Let be.
Enter king, queen, laertes, osric, and lords, with other
attendants with foils and gauntlets.
A table and flagons of wine on it.
King. Come, hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.
[the king puts laertes' hand into hamlet's. ]
ham. Give me your pardon, sir. I have done you wrong;
but pardon't, as you are a gentleman.
This presence knows,
and you must needs have heard, how i am punish'd
with sore distraction. What i have done
that might your nature, honour, and exception
roughly awake, i here proclaim was madness.
Was't hamlet wrong'd laertes? Never hamlet.
If hamlet from himself be taken away,
and when he's not himself does wrong laertes,
then hamlet does it not, hamlet denies it.
Who does it, then? His madness. If't be so,
hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
his madness is poor hamlet's enemy.
Sir, in this audience,
let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil
free me so far in your most generous thoughts
that i have shot my arrow o'er the house
and hurt my brother.
Laer. I am satisfied in nature,
whose motive in this case should stir me most
to my revenge. But in my terms of honour
i stand aloof, and will no reconcilement
till by some elder masters of known honour
i have a voice and precedent of peace
to keep my name ungor'd. But till that time
i do receive your offer'd love like love,
and will not wrong it.
Ham. I embrace it freely,
and will this brother's wager frankly play.
Give us the foils. Come on.
Laer. Come, one for me.
Ham. I'll be your foil, laertes. In mine ignorance
your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night,
stick fiery off indeed.
Laer. You mock me, sir.
Ham. No, by this bad.
King. Give them the foils, young osric. Cousin hamlet,
you know the wager?
Ham. Very well, my lord.
Your grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
King. I do not fear it, i have seen you both;
but since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.
Laer. This is too heavy; let me see another.
Ham. This likes me well. These foils have all a length?
Prepare to play.
Osr. Ay, my good lord.
King. Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.
If hamlet give the first or second hit,
or quit in answer of the third exchange,
let all the battlements their ordnance fire;
the king shall drink to hamlet's better breath,
and in the cup an union shall he throw
richer than that which four successive kings
in denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;
and let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
the trumpet to the cannoneer without,
the cannons to the heavens, the heaven to earth,
'now the king drinks to hamlet. ' come, begin.
And you the judges, bear a wary eye.
Ham. Come on, sir.
Laer. Come, my lord. They play.
Ham. One.
Laer. No.
Ham. Judgment!
Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit.
Laer. Well, again!
King. Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
here's to thy health.
[drum; trumpets sound; a piece goes off [within].
Give him the cup.
Ham. I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile.
Come. (they play. ) another hit. What say you?
Laer. A touch, a touch; i do confess't.
King. Our son shall win.
Queen. He's fat, and scant of breath.
Here, hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.
The queen carouses to thy fortune, hamlet.
Ham. Good madam!
King. Gertrude, do not drink.
Queen. I will, my lord; i pray you pardon me. Drinks.
King. [aside] it is the poison'd cup; it is too late.
Ham. I dare not drink yet, madam; by-and-by.
Queen. Come, let me wipe thy face.
Laer. My lord, i'll hit him now.
King. I do not think't.
Laer. [aside] and yet it is almost against my conscience.
Ham. Come for the third, laertes! You but dally.
Pray you pass with your best violence;
i am afeard you make a wanton of me.
Laer. Say you so? Come on. Play.
Osr. Nothing neither way.
Laer. Have at you now!
[laertes wounds hamlet; then] in scuffling, they
change rapiers, [and hamlet wounds laertes].
King. Part them! They are incens'd.
Ham. Nay come! Again! The queen falls.
Osr. Look to the queen there, ho!
Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?
Osr. How is't, laertes?
Laer. Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, osric.
I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.
Ham. How does the queen?
King. She sounds to see them bleed.
Queen. No, no! The drink, the drink! O my dear hamlet!
The drink, the drink! I am poison'd. [dies. ]
ham. O villany! Ho! Let the door be lock'd.
Treachery! Seek it out.
[laertes falls. ]
laer. It is here, hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain;
no medicine in the world can do thee good.
In thee there is not half an hour of life.
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
unbated and envenom'd. The foul practice
hath turn'd itself on me. Lo, here i lie,
never to rise again. Thy mother's poison'd.
I can no more. The king, the king's to blame.
Ham. The point envenom'd too?
Then, venom, to thy work. Hurts the king.
All. Treason! Treason!
King. O, yet defend me, friends! I am but hurt.
Ham. Here, thou incestuous, murd'rous, damned dane,
drink off this potion! Is thy union here?
Follow my mother. King dies.
Laer. He is justly serv'd.
It is a poison temper'd by himself.
Exchange forgiveness with me, noble hamlet.
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
nor thine on me! Dies.
Ham. Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
I am dead, horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
that are but mutes or audience to this act,
had i but time (as this fell sergeant, death,
is strict in his arrest) o, i could tell you-
but let it be. Horatio, i am dead;
thou liv'st; report me and my cause aright
to the unsatisfied.
Hor. Never believe it.
I am more an antique roman than a dane.
Here's yet some liquor left.
Ham. As th'art a man,
give me the cup. Let go! By heaven, i'll ha't.
O good horatio, what a wounded name
(things standing thus unknown) shall live behind me!
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,
absent thee from felicity awhile,
and in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
to tell my story. [march afar off, and shot within. ]
what warlike noise is this?
Osr. Young fortinbras, with conquest come from poland,
to the ambassadors of england gives
this warlike volley.
Ham. O, i die, horatio!
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit.
I cannot live to hear the news from england,
but i do prophesy th' election lights
on fortinbras. He has my dying voice.
So tell him, with th' occurrents, more and less,
which have solicited- the rest is silence. Dies.
Hor. Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,
and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
[march within. ]
why does the drum come hither?
Enter fortinbras and english ambassadors, with drum,
colours, and attendants.
Fort. Where is this sight?
Hor. What is it you will see?
If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
Fort. This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
what feast is toward in thine eternal cell
that thou so many princes at a shot
so bloodily hast struck.
Ambassador. The sight is dismal;
and our affairs from england come too late.
The ears are senseless that should give us bearing
to tell him his commandment is fulfill'd
that rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead.
Where should we have our thanks?
Hor. Not from his mouth,
had it th' ability of life to thank you.
He never gave commandment for their death.
But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
you from the polack wars, and you from england,
are here arriv'd, give order that these bodies
high on a stage be placed to the view;
and let me speak to the yet unknowing world
how these things came about. So shall you hear
of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause;
and, in this upshot, purposes mistook
fall'n on th' inventors' heads. All this can i
truly deliver.
Fort. Let us haste to hear it,
and call the noblest to the audience.
For me, with sorrow i embrace my fortune.
I have some rights of memory in this kingdom
which now, to claim my vantage doth invite me.
Hor. Of that i shall have also cause to speak,
and from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.
But let this same be presently perform'd,
even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance
on plots and errors happen.
Fort. Let four captains
bear hamlet like a soldier to the stage;
for he was likely, had he been put on,
to have prov'd most royally; and for his passage
the soldiers' music and the rites of war
speak loudly for him.
Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this
becomes the field but here shows much amiss.
Go, bid the soldiers shoot.
Exeunt marching; after the which a peal of ordnance
are shot off.
The end
